O ye, most dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science knowledge together with its explanation, and I have concluded it through its expositions and statements. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this part 'chirurgery', which is the work of hands.
And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and has spread throughout all, it has been perverted from its original science and purpose, with only small descriptions remaining in books written by ancient ones who have moved on to other matters. And from this arises errors and foolishness, and understanding is shut off and knowledge has been misled.
And it seems to me that I shall revive this together with the administration of this treatise according to the method of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; and come together with the forms of caustic implements, and other instruments for surgery, along with the adjustment of explanation and preparation as needed.
And because no good masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been displaced. And it is necessary for those who intervene to be well-versed in anatomy, as Galen says, understanding the judgment of limbs, their forms and connections and separations, having knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of veins, the movements and flowing vessels and resting ones, and where they originate.
And thus Hippocrates states that the mind is greatly important, while with the hand it is less so; especially in the art of surgery.
In the introduction of this book, we say that those who do not understand the things afore mentioned should be careful not to err and cause harm; for I have seen many times how others involved in this science abandon reason and sense experience.
In my view, a mad barber made an incision in an abscess of hard swellings or neck of a woman, and cut the arteries on the neck; so much blood came out that the woman died between her hands.
And I saw another barber treating a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a part of the bladder, and within three days the man died.
And I had already been summoned to attend him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if he was cut into it would die.
This physician took charge of another case involving a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was also an open wound; the ignorant doctor manipulated the fracture near the wound with considerable force, without giving any support to the wound itself, resulting in such outcome. He instructed him not to allow it to dislocate again; he remained like this until the leg had fully healed and returned to normal function before leading to ruin.
I was called upon and came to him quickly, and hurriedly went to dislocate the leg; and when I saw it had been dislocated so far, it was in peace and felt no pain.
But the contamination had already taken hold of the limb and could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
And see another mirror which fell upon an advanced abscess, and then inflamed by the wickedness of its lordship.
For cancer, when it is free of black bile humor, one must not touch it with iron unless it's partially there so that all corrupted matter can be removed.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: one being where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
the s (with.
Take up your tools with caution and begin treating your patients gently but firmly, using the best method so by God's grace you come to health and are praised; let go of treatments that give hope for serious healing; and use these tools as long as they do not cause doubt in you, and have faith within yourself to bring about this world to another of glory.
In some of his warnings, Galien says: "Do not take care of bad illnesses that you might be called foolish physicians."
I have devised this treatise according to these three chapters.
The first chapter concerns fire and medicinal cauldrons of water, and is ordered from the head to the feet; as well as forms of tumors, ferrumens of cauldrons, and all that is necessary in its use.
The second chapter is about cutting and trimming, as well as cupping and wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; the chapter is ordered and includes forms of tumors.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisted limbs, as well as similar things; it is ordered from the head to the feet, including forms of tumors.
Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the nature of the aid and harm from each constitution.
I say that the nature of aid and harm is the longest word and subtle science and hidden solutions; and on this many wise ones spoke, and agreed with it; but their words are few to me, for I return its lengthiness.
I say that cauterization helps all constitutions where there is matter; for two kinds of constitutions exist: those that are hot and sensitive to material, and those that are dry and sensitive to material.
In the complexion of heat and dryness together, they agree that fire cautery is greatly helpful; but others say otherwise: that cautery has no value in diseases arising from excessive warmth and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated with heat or dryness in illnesses caused by warmth, nor inherently; but those who say otherwise claim that cautery provides great help to diseases characterized by heat and dryness within men's bodies. For when you examine the body and its moisture in relation to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I heed this word. For I have found no instance through experiment.
For all the diverse conditions and diseases and their occurrences of which we have often seen in our experience. And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the cautery.
And know, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of the cures and has greater kindness than medicinal burning cautery.
les doue;d eucht sus they tost Cler.
Hot remedies come from one body part to another through connection, and bring severe diseases in need of healing to the affected member; and sometimes they cause the patient's death.
The veins due to their highness and the kindness of their essence do not accomplish this unless there is excess.
And this is what I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it lies in the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from verbosity because I do not wish that you should know the secret either by word or by deed, as the philosopher demonstrates. Now take this into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they are done at times when cauterizations should be made, and purulent abscesses.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all cases, because the damage occurrerening is due to removal by cauterization; and especially if the cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
And ail; and ce cuidant parce est cite; car nes li is qui pourteler les cure of the cest en tant qu’auteret pendent que il sient lee lor. L'ad, si it d est ad de sorent la, et li messe, ail nus and est tout les mules cuent ce qui et esoie, andre ome that celié etes the chauz.
And one may find that the disease occurs at any time according to the constitution of the sick person and the nature of their ailment and its vitality; and there are excesses gathered in them through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administered on-site where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and other such matters, where no great pain returns; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicine, and that is true; but they falsely believe that caustics have no value after medicine, and their understanding is flawed because when we administer treatment methods in any illness and they prove to be worthless, then we apply our caustics, and they do. Therefore, it is well understood that caustics are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
The ancient ones said that surgical instruments made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, attributing this to the quality of gold and its substance's value; they stated that the wound from a cauterization does not cause putrefaction but is indeed beneficial as I have tested it, finding in some individuals that it works. Cauterizations with gold are more effective than those with iron, just as they said.
And in any case when you heat an instrument made of gold, it is not due to the color of the gold, and cools down quickly; if overheated, it causes burns; thus there are enough obstacles.
And for this reason we use fire cautery in our work as has been proven effective to us.
Or I have ordered this chapter from the neck down to the feet, so that it may be easier to find.
To the olive oil caustic
These caustics are for moisture and coldness on the brain; there are two ways to perform it due to a disease called "soda," as well as from many humors descending from the head, ears, causing multitude of dreams and pain in teeth and throat, mainly to all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, stroke, apoplexy, etc.
the p arles sargent: Andres.
And then make him sit with his legs crossed between your hands, and place your hands on either side of his thighs; afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his neck between his two eyes; and wherever you see come his leg muscles, bleed first before warming up the cautery called "olivare," which is shaped as follows:
And then place the leap mark with ink, and draw and stretch your hand slightly while turning it back and forth; then lift your hand gently, and where you see the bone protruding a little piece of skin; if you do not see this, continue using the cautery until you can see the bone as I have instructed you; afterwards take some ointment, and apply it to warm and soft cotton inside, and place it on the leap mark, leaving it for three days; after that, cover with fine cloth soaked in butter; let it remain until the burning subsides; afterwards treat the wound with an ointamet called "tetrafarmacon," until healed.
And if the old ones say that when the wound remains open for longer, it cleanses better; and therefore apply medication to it.
And some say that the caustic should be used sparingly when a part of the bone has been burnt, and then reset what is burned from the bone, and treated accordingly.
And others say that the caustic should be applied generously, and pressed hard enough to flatten the bone as wide as the wool women put in their shoes so that the humors can flow outwardly; and one must treat the open wound for a long time afterwards, then heal it and bandage.
And these two ways of caustication do not seem to me to be entirely good for everyone; but rather it should be left in some cases where fear is present. I also find that the shoulder joints are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we have witnessed in other limbs; similarly, when the shoulder of a sick person is naturally weak, and the first sign of caustication is more beneficial and effective for me, then from such use I work accordingly for health.
Pain from anguish grips the head
When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie," as well as cleansing of the head and oils and plasters; if they undergo the cautery we have previously mentioned, it is ineffective.
Be mindful that the patient's head is of a serious condition and not too cold; then you should cauterize below the previously mentioned cautery, just as we have described above.
s.
Of fire cautery of the head When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and illness extends to the neck, and the head is purged with cleansing medicines, and other treatments as previously mentioned for diseases have been done, but none help: then you make fire cauteries according to two manners, that is, with medicine for ague and with fennel.
The cautery for ague is to take a piece of alum as wide as two finger's breadth, and peel off the bark and cover it with two grains of pitch; then form the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can replace the piece of alum under the skin; and when it has been replaced well and left like this for sixteen hours; and then remove the bandage and scrape off the alum, leaving the wound as is for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until suppuration occurs.
After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see, apply any of the burning medicines I have written or listed in my treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is made according to this manner. Heat the cautery as follows:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a hole or has .i. small bump, and at one end there's a slight bulge with a small opening; place it on the painful spot, hold your hand steady, and gently turn the fiery part, until half of the pointed tip becomes red-hot; then remove your hand allowing an abundance of blood to flow.
After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then put moistened cotton with butter on it; and treat the wound with ointment until healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellaris," at the tip, and avoid sealing the artery in this migraine which is not an acute one.
Migraine
When curing migraines as we have previously described in divisions of diseases and it does not work, and you see that the cautery before mentioned by the medicine and iron is not sufficient, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellaris" until it becomes white; and with such a hand, gently press half an hour on the sore area, and remove your hand once, and pull straight so as not to seal the artery or reach bone; and beware of the lower jaw that moves when chewing, and ensure that nerves do not have direct contact but rather move together with the skin and that spasms do not affect the patient, and be wary of bleeding from the sealed artery if it becomes blocked, or if blockage is feared; leave a small opening in place. However, I will tell you how to restore blood flow when an artery has been sealed, and I will show you where it opens herein this book.
If you see that these cauterizations do not relieve the illness and the patient suffers greatly, perform cauterization in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see this, apply the cautery we have mentioned or for artery extraction with a cautery that has two blades; and this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
From the pain in the ears caused by coldness
When there is pain in the ears from coldness, and we have applied soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not subside, then warm this cautery called "point," of which here is the form:
After pointing around the entire ear of the patient, where both sides feel pain, and moving slightly above the root of the ear after finding its place again; and have six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healthy again.
For the treatment of the mouth
Torture that must be treated with a caustic is only those caused by moisture, as we have said in the classification of diseases; and do not apply caustic to similar ones coming from sores and spittle from glands.
When treating this type of torment that causes swelling from worms and purging, gargling, it's not effective, then you must perform three cauterizations on the patient: one at the root of the ear, another a bit further back towards the temple, and the third in the corner near the inner lips; place the cautery where the part is healthy, and direct the cautery to the top of the ear just below a bit past the tip, with another on the temple as long as a finger's width; leave the cautery until half the skin becomes scorched; this is the method for the cautery.
And this is the type of cut that we have described before, but it is slightly more subtle and the knife should be somewhat larger; after resetting it as I have previously explained, until it heals.
When treating an early apoplexy as we have described and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you must perform four cauterizations: two on each of the two angles of the head, one in the middle of the forehead, and one at the area called "vessels" as we have previously said, and another above the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have described before.
Of languor
For this illness requires giving the patient large years and purging medicines to clear the brain; afterwards, remove the chief of the ailment entirely, and place upon the occiput a hemp poultice as written or taught in poultice treatments; here is the method of cautery: do so as I have instructed.
If it is thus, well done; and if not, do the following: make three cauteries below the head down to the neck with an interval of two fingers between each one; treat as you have learned for others, and if you see a need, place another in the middle; and if necessary, two others on either horn, and treat until well; and it is the caustery called 'olivary', as I have previously mentioned.
of coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be cleansed of dirt and as we have previously said; after washing the patient's head, then make a fire cautery on each horn, and one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, so make four cauteries along the spine of the back; let it be until the most yellowish flesh appears, then remove your hand; afterward care for it until it heals, and apply the caustic called "olivare" that we have previously said.
concerning epilepsy
Epileptics should only use iron fire-cautery if they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to soften the brain with other treatments we have mentioned in the section when patients are greatly suffering and resistant to medical care.
And if it is a child who cannot endure the treatment, they shall do gargling and chewing to soothe the brain often with bone meats; afterward, the head is milled, followed by one cauterization as we have said before, and one on the vessel, and each horn. And if the patient is greatly suffering and resistant, they shall be cauterized as I have instructed for those with paralysis and softening of limbs at the spine between the neck and back, and it should be an olive-wood cautery according to my method described.
If the patient is a child, they shall receive a subtle cauterization in this manner:
When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then the fire caustic of parts that we have said to those who have paralysis.
And if caused by melancholy are the excesses declining into melancholy, and the body is weakly moist, then give it to drink something so that the brain may be clarified, according as it stands in the part of the head's division.
After the head of the patient is reigned; after one makes a well-made tether, like a circle, put it within the head; and let the patient be crossed with branches, and held firmly from all sides; then present the liniment, and anoint with butter from old sheep's wool; and warm up the fire quickly so that the patient can endure it; afterward empty the circle from inside the head, and let it cool down; and do this to each sick person once a week with other good governance until they are healthy.
When you see that the caustic burns in various places throughout the entire cautery, this method of cauterization moistens the brain equally; then place a cotton wool soaked in butter and hare grease upon it.
From the edge of the eyes Firstly, when the signs I have mentioned in the division appear with respect to the eyes, then begin and give the patient something that purifies the head, and protects from all moisture, and makes them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
After the command to raise his head again, and he makes a cautery in the middle of the forehead, and he makes two cauterizations on top of the two temples where the nerves of the temple are at both eyes together, or in one they may be located; close all veins and arteries with the cautery that come from above the crown, making it long according to the width of the temple; and guard against blood loss, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and making incision how to staunch it; never do a cautery or ligature below the two bones at the back.
on dou corps des larmes
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed to staying on the veins, or near the arteries that appear before the forehead; and one sees they are from cold, watery excesses, then you do the cautery as I said at the beginning in the descending part for the eyes: i.e., a cauterization under the forehead, ii. cauterizations above the two temples, and ii. cauterizations or haiterel below the two bones; and if more is needed, you carefully cauterize just a small area over each eyebrow.
When tears fill within the body of the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three drinks of a medicinal wine; afterward, do a fire cautery or olive oil caustic on his head, and two "clavilis" cauterizations above each eyebrow, slightly below the brow bones; and be careful to avoid cutting into the artery. And this is the form of the fire cautery, which is called "clavilis":
When the skin of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply the ointment of this fire cautery called "olivare". Here is its form:
And if you see two cauteries above the two sores that are similar to eyelashes; do not leave the hand except until one-third of the skin is burned, according to the manner I have described.
If there:t in English: This: At no time do the eyelash hairs turn into scales and touch the eye, and it is treated with cautery in two ways: that of fire or burning medication.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Once the hairs have grown and are even, then put the patient in a bed; make sure there is enough space for the eyelids to be as wide as one's cheek, and the beginning of the scar should resemble that near the hairs. Then place cotton wool soaked in egg white and musk essence on the eye.
After cauterizing the wound you have made little by little many times, let the skin be scorched at that spot; and signs of healing in the wound are when you see the paper recede, and hairs rise to the length of oil; then take your hand off, and leave it for iii days, then apply softened cotton with butter until the burn is gone; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healthy.
And if afterwards hairs come in and the paper is softened as before, then continue cauterizing at that same spot; and if the hair fails, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural place, and they are even, and do not touch the oil part.
The fire cautery of medical use is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment in the shape of myrtle leaves, then take French soap and hot wax, one-third each, and grind them together well; and do it quickly before it cools, then apply it over the form as you made like myrtamolet leaves, and put on paper. And if the disease holds in just a single bone only, work on just one, and so forth; and put cotton moistened with oil underneath. And the patient's head should be kept clean, and place your two fingers showing over the medicine, and press slightly every time the patient feels the tingling of the medicine, as it is like fire burning. When you have done this for a long time, give yourself the proper medication. And when the inflammation is gone, lift up the dressing, and if you see that it has been raised as if by heating or incision, then it is well; otherwise, return additional medicine to the place where it has not worked yet until your actions are equal, and bones aligned properly; then cover with cotton wool soaked in oil until the scabs fall off, afterwards cleanse the wound of ointment called "dyafenis" among others, until it is healthy.
And be sure to carefully guard your work so that the medicine does not separate from the bones. And if the dressing becomes weak again, and the hairs prick at the edge, restart the medicine on that place properly as you did before; afterwards cleanse it until it is healthy; this is like a wound with moss:
And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to this let there be constraints; and do not return the right path to those who have studied this art.
Regarding the treatment of a fistula by fire.
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not prove effective, then it is necessary for you to perform a fire cautery according to this manner.
by bonstrat, and the t.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat the pus and dryness; and if it is closed, work on it, and rub hard over the bow; after placing a hot caustic there properly, hold your hand to the caustic near the sensitive area above the oil, so that your hands do not go mad; place the caustic in the fat of the oil, and corrupt.
If you come at the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be best. If not, restart the cannot once more and if necessary, leave for iii days; then apply cotton wool soaked in oil, and continue with a drying ointment until it is healed, and after xl days when it has healed, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; follow as per what appears on your recipe.
And there is a method of treating a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned. Listen to the fistula, and feel it underneaturally soft (tender), and after placing in the opening, iii small camahans subtilly shaped like this: They make it the quantity of one ounce; and hold your hand or whatsofter firmly, so that the patient does not move an inch, until the lead has melted into its place; and then you must put cotton wool moistened with a little water on top: if the lead is correctly placed there by a fistula, it will heal miraculously quickly.
And if the fistula is healed by the caustic treatment we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then one must administer a purgative and bring back the flete to its proper place in accordance with what should be right for that particular body.
Of cracks in the lips. Many times there are ruptures in lips called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
When you treat these ruptures as we have described in sections, and the remedy does not help, then apply a small cautery lance according to this method:
And apply heat quickly to those ruptures until the wound is closed; then cleanse the area with cerate until it is healed.
by. i wonder et the there, and ch. If you have:20s.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the eye socket, palate, or around the roots of the teeth, after it has undergone decay and growth and becomes old and turns into a fistula; you treat it as we have described in sections, but it does not heal: then it is necessary for you to have a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after cutting or opening the faster of the fistula, and hold your hand until the fire comes to its end, and afterwards there; and do so once or twice, after treating as we have described in treatments, until it is healthy; if treated thusly, it is good; but if not, then you must discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in this chapter.
With slight movements of the teeth.
When the gums are weakened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat with medicines and this does not work: then place the head of the patient in his health; after cooling off the cautery as follows so that you put a cone on the tooth; and insert into the cone within the dent heats up quickly, and hold the hand until warmth comes to the root of the teeth; afterwards remove your hand and re-cautere according to desire; after wash his mouth with salted water, and rinse one hour and ache.
And in this manner, the tooth which was moving is fixed, and the gums are made soft and tight, and the infected moisture dried out.
From the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from coldness, or there is cold and wind, and medical remedies are not effective, then it needs treatment by caustic methods: caustic butter and fire caustic.
Cautery of butter is such that you take the butter from a cow, and the tip into an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and the fur in butter melts, and put on the sore tooth quickly; thus do so often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see hair and cotton melted with butter cooled, then apply it to the painful tooth, and cover with a hot iron until the heat reaches closure around the tooth.
The caustic of fire is such that you take a piece of iron or copper and make it large enough so the heat does not reach the patient's mouth. After heating the caustic, which will come about afterward, apply it to the tooth and hold your hand until it has cooled; do this often as the pain will be eased on that day or the next. It is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter before applying the caustic, then remove it quickly; and that is the form of the caustic:
When scrofulous swellings are caused by cold humors and do not respond to medicine, then apply the following method with fire: create two openings for smoke on another part; heat a cautery once or twice over an abscess until reaching its peak; if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to its size and leave it thus for three days; cover with cotton soaked in butter until the burning sensation subsides. Then treat the area with ointments and dressings until healed.
When ulcers prevail in the glandular ducts, especially from cold constitution, it is necessary to first purge with soluble medicines; then perform a fire cautery at the root of the throat but be careful not to reach as far as the throat itself and do not burn too deeply. Then make another fire cautery at the junction where the neck meets the top of the spine, using the form called "clavile" that we have described before; treat the area until it is healed as previously instructed.
Of the tooth When all diseases of the upper jaw are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an early disease: one should place two cauterizations on either side in front of the eyes; another cauterization between the nipples; and there is a cauterization called "clavile" according to the form previously mentioned.
And if you see it, place cauterizations by pinching the entire "poins" area which is previously mentioned in ear disease; and let them be up to .xxx., or as indicated. After curing the location according to what has been described beforehand, there are three other cauterizations following this form:
And thus is the fire cautery lighter, for you make it three times over.
From the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the disaster. .
Et perform the cautery on his cheek until it is pierced to its bone, and then apply together four cauterizations; and thus cautery is made with the cautery tool having three points, which is why the pattern of cauterization consists of these four cauterizations: and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and it is the form of the cautery tool that has three points.
And at no time are placed near this one nerve where there are eight cauterizations;
After placing the cautery near it with wool; then allow the patient to rest and do not move their limbs for long periods until they are well supported.
If it is dislocated above, the following occurs rarely, then perform a cauterization at the base of the wound, or many cauterizations in pricking. For the joint is repositioned, and bone is moistened, and the patient's maladies are healed.
For the cautery on a pleurisy
The ancients said that for pleurisy one should perform root cauteries of aristologiae in this manner: take the longest possible root of an aristology plant, dry and prepare it to be as thick and long as your fingers; coat with oil and hold over fire, then cauterize. One cautery between the clavicle and collarbone, two small ones slightly descending on the part above the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth vertebrae, declining backward a bit; one in front of the pelvis, another over the stomach, and one between the arms' inner sides. Two others at the lower costae, and one where lies the root placed between them; do not press with your hand but perform as if smelling an odorant.
A certain ancient one said that no man should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it up and place it between the ribs until reaching an abscess; then comes great pain, as we have stated in the liver abscess case. However, in this work of art there is fear or death for the patient now, or fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
An ancient one declared that no man should employ a fire cautery resembling a razor, and warm it then positioning it betwixt ribs until an abscess is reached; thus follows severe pain, as we've noted in the liver abscess instance. Yet within this craft there lies dread or mortality for the patient presently, or a fistula arises which cannot be cured.
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have mentioned in the division of treatments, and it proves ineffective, then there are three methods of fire cautery that all prove beneficial.
There is one way to do this: make .iii. or .iiij. incisions, aligned with the length of the wound, according to the figure of the liver incision we have mentioned before; and do not press all your incisions together, and let the patient lie on their back.
And another way of incision is to make the one with .ij. points, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and lift the bone that is where the wound extends from or the edge of the patient's left side, and let elevations which you lift the bone according to its size, according to the length of the body, and let the incision be according to the width of the body.
After making the two points incandescent until piercing through on the other side, and then press with the incision, so there will be .iiij. And if you see it, incise all of the incision at .iij. points. After curing when it has been infected for a long time, and this is enough as to the previous mentioned cures.
Of dropsy
Cauterization is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner called "ascites". When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions and your treatment does not work, then it becomes necessary to make four cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one spot on the hips; and let the cauterization be close to the source of heat.
After leave the open wound to heal for long periods of time, and do not cease treating the patient after cauterization; and healing will occur quickly, and both intentions (healing and curing) shall be together with the help of God.
The form of fire treatment for the abdomen should be the spatula we have previously shown; and that for the back should be oval-shaped, as it is here before illustrated.
Of the swelling of sores When sores are swollen in those who are jaundiced and filled with yellowish pus, one must cauterize on the back between the ring finger and little finger; and lift your hand with the cautery turning. And do not go too deep, thus you seal off the yellowish pus, and let it be according to this form:
by ;
Of fainting
When the solution of stomach comes from cold and moisture, while the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are bloated, they cannot be treated by ordinary methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vitality. Thus, one should perform a major cautery on the stomach according to what was previously mentioned or stomach cautery, where cauterization circulates around it; four subtle cauteries about the mouth (orifice), each as subtle as needle cauterization, and two over the flanks.
And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, perform cautery on the finger, and one cauterization on each joint, and two small cauterizations near the stomach beside the major one, because the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
Treatment of boils
When boils are numerous or of the foundation type, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and treated as we have said in sections, if it does not help, then apply cauterization: Three on the spine above the back, close to the almandate point and gradually angled upwards, and one near the chin. Two sides.
Cauatere de li liau telle les soun le cite au. ij. est des, et que se il ne li vient li ruse a la cautere sus le pleste morsue on le boute: .i. Si sesan ouestant, suesle cauet de la coulent l'oeuf le oinse en s; et ij., et dese le cure auce, mais telle a lou n’a.
of the chilblain called "theolon"
When you treat the chilblain (athelul), if you feel weakened and appear pale, apply a fire-heated iron as soon as possible over it; let your hand rest near the vein's origin until blood flows from it, which will stop the bleeding; do this once or twice. If there is much chilblain, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward apply healing ointments until they are well-healed; and if you use a large iron for cupping (athelul), it will provide more help.
of a wound badly treated
When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, we will describe in detail, if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
When a disease comes as a fistula with decayed and putrefied flesh and corrupted moisture, the treatment requires careful attention to all parts of the tent (wound), knowing how much each part is affected. After applying cautery that appears like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount the tent has entered, then resume cauterization as long as the corrupted and rotten body requires, once or twice or thrice, depending on the amount of work needed; and take care not to burn the nerves that are involved. If the fistule goes into the bladder or intestine, beware these exits, do not attempt cures elsewhere but in their vicinity, and think they are not far-reaching; after treating the exit until it is healthy, if the matter has been expelled for a long time, know that the exit is completely healed. And if the materials have not been removed for a long period, realize that the exit is swoln and corrupted at the base; thus as we will describe in detail.
Concerning kidney disease: When the pain of cold comes with severe swelling and loss of desire, then one should make a cautery on both sides of the groin with the pointed cauterizer we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, which will provide greater aid.
Concerning the bladder When the bladder is hard and cold with moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, one should make a cautery on the part behind the bladder where hair begins at the fingertips; there will be two cauteries to each side, as long as needed; and also one cauterization along the back, or two if necessary; and use the pointed cauterizer according to the previously mentioned form.
Of a dislocation When the testicles are cold and moist and cannot produce due to this condition, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed maturation, causing great pain when they do arrive: then it is necessary for you to make .iii. cauterizations around the scrotum as we have said about the bladder cauterization, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the third cautery be on the groin, as we have said.
Of the hip
When viscous moistures descend into the buttock box, and for this reason it moves out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the large intestine veils the exit of feces are found, so you must cauterize the patient over the buttock box with a cautery resembling a circle, and position it as the area turns, ensuring the box is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, use three large olive oil cauldrons, and let the cauters be as broad as all the keys; and continue until it is cleaned thoroughly.
For pain in the buttock When pain comes in the region of the thigh, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers as we have said in the division and treatment does not help, and the illness is longstanding: then you must purge the sick person of large humors with foul pills or other good-smelling pills.
After performing the surgery; and the method of such cauterization is in two ways: namely using burning medicines, and fire cauterization. Fire cauterization has many methods, among which one is as follows: you perform triangularly three burns on the region of the thigh, with good depth and size, spacing them apart as wide as a thumb; they should be olive-shaped; never done in the middle of the head of the thigh, for there are four following this form:
And if you see it after performing the cauterization of the circle we have mentioned earlier for the shoulder dislocation; but do so in such a way that the circle encompebles the entire thigh, and all sides are burned.
In cases of sciatica when the pain is in the hip and does not reach up to the thigh or leg; if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two fire cauteries where the patient indicates they feel the pain, and one fire cautery above the ankle four fingers wide, a little towards the left side; this should be a cutaneous caustic, and scrape as deep as you can see. If the patient feels the pain spreading up to two or three toes or almost there, burn at the point where they feel the pain with either three or four points on what is called the "points" fire cautery.
And if the work is not done properly and there is more pain; and if it has been since the pain moved from below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with either cutaneous or circular caustic, and take good care in all your caustics that you do not harm the nerves and large arteries, causing further damage and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen others who were subjected to cauterization above the ankle of the foot, and they harmed so much that the leg became completely swoln, and the feet too, and pierced and rotten all over; after a stomach poisoning which caused his death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a fire cupping on both sides as per this method. // And the wise say about the haunch's fire cupping, which follows these instructions: Make an iron piece of such size as a small button or slightly smaller, and leave gaps between them with space equal to that of a leech; the gaps should be over two parts and evenly spaced, and the form is.
And let it be scorched until all red and blistered, then place it on the bag of the affected haunch, and twist around its inner edge; causticate once with two cuppings alternately and leave for three days; afterwards, apply a butter poultice, leaving the open wound exposed for a long time; after treating with ointment until healed.
Albuquerque says that we use little of this fire cupping due to fear in its regard, and few who use it; nonetheboute, however, it is a good fire cupping method if one can endure it, and where it adheres.
The pain of the sore back
When pain comes to the back from falling or blows or excessive blood loss, or from cold matter spreading out - none of these cases require cauterization; rather, it is for those who come from an influx of cold matter.
After the patient has expelled fetid pills or other substances, place them on their back where the pain is located, in three lines marked with a dot; and in each line, perform five cauterizations or more depending on the virtue and quantity that the patient can tolerate; and do the cauterization as per the 'point' technique of cauterization; and if you see it necessary, make either three or four cauterizations at the midline using this method.
theird, t
When you see this wound and observe it healing, then cauterize using a caustic dressing in the following manner:
If the caustic dressing is to be applied to any part of the spine, ensure that each section is treated evenly. And if you see it necessary, apply a pricking caustic around the spine with 2 or 3 lines so they are close together. After treating the area until it heals as we have said, be careful not to place the caustic in an inflamed area near nerves.
For pain relief of the joints
When joint pain arises from moistures spread throughout the body, and when pain occurs in the toes, which those who treat them call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be healed with medicines, then they are treated with caustics as follows: make numerous caustics around the joint of the foot, and let the caustics be olive oil according to this form.
And if there is a need to grasp the face of the foot, one makes caustics all over where they are called "points". And if pain comes up to joints and other joints, which happens often, then one makes caustics on each knee III or IV from each part, at every olive oil caustic; and if more is needed, make more, but do not hold your hand too close until the essence of color has been achieved.
And if pain goes up to knees and the back, one administers the caustic as we have said in this chapter. And if there is pain in the hands, make points around the phalange II lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then apply points on each joint and at the hair of the hand; and if pain comes up to ears or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care for the patient and administer medicines. For if you give good care and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help.
Of the dislocation due to luxation
When dislocation comes inwardly and the veins protrude from their vessels completely, then when you see it needs to be treated, do not wait until tomorrow; use things that stimulate his belly so the bowels descend from it. After he sits on your back between your hands, instruct him to stretch out his leg while the dislocation is repaired and the limbs are aligned with yours, then bind him up at the dislocation above the bone of the elbow, and make a full circle sign around most of his body; then apply the caustic as shown in this shape:
Until it is white and has become sensitive. Then bind the veins in their place; have him stretch out his hand so that they do not return backwards. Work well on the legs of the sick person, and put a cushion and a sling under his thighs, and another below his heels which you hold with your hands; then apply the caustic over the sign with your entire hand, keeping it straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach the first time, repeat again until you go as far as the binge without letting any veins escape while doing the cauterization; do not burn him. Be careful that the sick person does not die or suffer other ills because of this.
And know that when you come near to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are of no value. It is necessary for a child's caustic to be subtle according to the measure of its size, and large people also proportionately large; after 3 days treat it at the site of burning with butter until the scalding is gone; then use other ointments until healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well closed up; and it must be that its bandages are long-lasting so that the swelling does not protrude when he tries to get in bed.
And after 40 days, when he wishes to stand up, let him dress a well-made bandage and wear it for another 40 days; and have good rest, so that he works little and guards against excessive drinking or eating, and shouting too much; and when this instruction is completed, then he shall be fully recovered. And I will say hereafter the treatment in his chapter on haircutting. Regarding the abdominal region
When lumps come into other bodies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one fire cautery as needed according to its quantity, and let the third part be burned; afterward treat it as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a fire cautery at three angles in this form:
But first sign the edge of the wound and make a line across above the lump, and another below, and hold your hand over all the fire cautery. But the first fire cautery is lighter and more mobile.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medicine treatment is not effective, then it must be treated with caustication using a cautery called "poins," and the caustication should be according to the length of the member, its size, weakness, virtue, location of twists, and pain. If the first cauterization is suitable, that's good; if not, begin another cauterization above it, for it is customary that it must move in the limb nearest to it, so you must make the caustications until the patient is healed.
In pharmacy
If the physician has been healed many times by caustication, and especially diseases that come from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. Can you see it causticate, take care if the disease is in the beginning, and if they are cured as we have said in the division, and do not or late; and die. five cauterizations above the chief: one in front of temples; and other forehead at end; and two on ears, and so that leave until osseize to it soars from the ears, and le au is after; and five below tail; and they are out of ailment causticization as head;
And if the infection is widespread and clearly evident, then it should be treated with the cauterization techniques we have mentioned previously; and a small cautery that does not burn too deeply, and two on the spine of the neck, and five on the back spine, and one large one near the navel and another nearby, and two on each shoulder blade, and two on the ribs, and two over the elbow tendons, and one for each joint of hands and feet, and over the palm creases; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are behind pressing, and never cauterize directly on the bone of the finger or stomach, nor on the liver.
And know that the more you do with cauterization, the better it helps and benefits them; and know that the sick person does not feel pain from cauterization as a healthy person would, because their body is already completely corrupted. It should be done large or small depending on the members and joints, according to how you will find in handling of iron weapons. After curing them back with flour paste mixed with honey and other remedies until they are healed.
And know that after applying a poultice made from boilings: mix it with honey and apply as needed, according to how you will find in handling of iron weapons; and after curing them back. Apply the poultice mixed with other remedies until they are healed. After curing them in manners whereof on your hand is found by applying a bandage or dressings. And apply as needed, according to finding in honey and how many ways of using iron weapons; and after bandaging, except the first time you will find it with what I find other remedies until they are healed, according to manners where as you have found.
When inflammation comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and salves, and it is not healed, then you should make cauterizations on the limb according to its size and significance; the cautery should be slightly penetrating into the color of the skin. Then treat with ointments until it is healed. Sometimes a cautery is made at the hand, foot, or back, where the nerve causes movement in the limb, thus there may be bone inflamm groin, but do not interfere unless you are familiar with the members and pathways of moving nerves.
The text describes a condition called "albares" or "gout," which is an affliction that causes painful swelling in joints due to uric acid crystals. It occurs commonly at night, with the big toe being affected most often but can affect other parts of the body as well.
When the condition known as "gout" becomes chronic, and medical remedies prove ineffective, then cauterize with a cautery slightly on the surface, according to the quantity of blood vessels present; until the discoloration is removed, and it moves its color. Then treat with fine flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and bull's blood and goose blood, one part each; mix everything together, bind it in a cloth, and apply it to the area until healed.
The treatment of ulcers by cautery
When an ulcer begins to appear and you wish to stop it, cauterize the area with cautery that appears as a complete circle around the entire ulcer. However, healthy individuals also say cauterization should be done in the center of the ulcer; however, I do not believe this is good because I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted again, and I have never wanted to see such an occurrence before; moreover, a more direct course would be to apply cautery around it using "circular" caustic as we have previously mentioned in many cases of cauterizations.
For the inflammation that cannot die down
When anyone suffers from an illness known as "adubelati," which is slow to kill due to excess waste or the state of the patient when they are very old (that is, too weak) and have little blood, or because of time; and you see it rushing towards death: then cauterize around with many small cauldrons by pricking; afterwards leave them as such. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see the entire cautery cut apart, heat the caustic of which there is the form:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the caustic has pierced the skin, and be such cauldrons that the patient feels behind them somewhat so that the course of putrefaction is directed. After curing, make it perfectly clean.
The healing of fire wounds by iron
There is another way of illness known as "corrosive," and it is nothing but a mixture in the limb, for it consumes the limbs just like dry sticks with fire. If you see this disease present that can suffer cauterization together with fire, then accordingly perform small and large cauterizations with hot irons according to what suits the site or where the illness is; after cauterizing all parts until you have burned off all corruption, leaving nothing of it so that everything that has been corrupted may become ossified. And afterwards leave for three days, and apply oil poultices on the heated causticized sores until the fire-burns are ossified, and all the corruption is gone. After the treatment with ointments generating heat: and if after three days the area does not look healthy, then it is good; but if not, resume cauterization on what remains of the corrupted limb sores. This mixture has never been healed in situ by leeching while performing fire-cauterization; however, fire-cauterization is always more helpful, and I have already mentioned the treatment with leeching in the division: take as much as you need.
small stones that come to the feet
Often it happens that in the feet a disease appears behind which is called "closed" according to our thought, and is a large tumor causing pain in the foot. The treatment for this disease has two methods: cautery of fire and cautery of hot water. Fire cautery is such that you heat a caustic similar to a bellows made of copper, crafted from good iron able to pierce through all parts, with sharp edges; after heating it fully above the nail, turn your hand entirely around the nail until it reaches the boiling point, and leave it as such for three days until pus begins to form; then make a plaster of malva seeds ground finely, apply it overnight, allowing the nail to detach and be uprooted from its roots. Afterward, treat the wound with healing ointment continuously until healthy again.
If they are converted forward the body, and it often occurs in hands and feet; then you must administer hot water cautery; and here is how: take a container of brass or iron, or a copper pan, place it over the nail and anvil (that is to say for warts); put the container around so that it encompasses completely, then add some hot water, hold your hand firmly, press with your hand turning until the edge of the container reaches the root of the nastery; allow the malady patient to endure a bit of the stinging hot water for an hour; leave as such, and it will detach from all its roots. Do this repeatedly, until you have removed everything on the body, then treat with healing ointments that regenerate skin.
to d a lore:
When anyone shakes from coldness of nerves, or fever quartan or other, it is fitting that you make .iiij. cauteries or .iv. along the spine on the back; one cautery between each vertebrae; and one at a point, and another on the stomach with an olive oil cauterization; this will cease the shaking, and restore health from the cold disease.
Of pus-filled blisters
Not appearing in front of the body bathed or pus-filled blisters that come from large corrupt substances. When they first appear, make cauterization above each head of the blister: a delicate cautery with wood of myrtle, its tip held to fire, or long root of aristolochia, or lenticular cautery. And not at once is one cauterized when it appears, according to this method; they cannot grow further forward but the superfluity from which they come is broken and made healthy; but it must be done after blood evacuation.
When the artery is cauterized Many times it occurs that there is great bleeding from the artery that has been cauterized at the wound which comes to the edge, or in the incision of an abscess, or on a limb, and similar things; and it is very bad to stop the bleeding.
And anyway if this happens to anyone, hurry and place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very hard until the blood is calmed below your finger, and no more flows; then put a few olive oil caustics, both small and large, until they are all red-hot; then take .i., or great or small according to the wound and where the artery runs, and place the cauterizer on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood flow ceases.
And if it bursts out when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the fire cautery is extinguished, quickly take another of the cauterizations that are in the fire.
And continue to do one after the other until the blood is clotted; and be careful not to burn the nerve near it, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; know that when the artery bleeds, it cannot be stopped alone if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have said: either by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied which can stop blood.
Who will administer the stopping of bleeding tightly with linens or putting burning things on it, or other similar things, if not much benefit is seen.
If this happens to someone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then one must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until blood is seen flowing over the wound and vein; and do not move it, but apply a cold cloth often enough that it is very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and stops running; then make incisions as needed for cauterization and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicine, and poultices, causes, decoctions, and forms of cauters; and I placed that chapter up to the feet, and now I will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that it is easier to find what one wants.
And thus as I begin this section, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of the fire cauterizations, and therefore greater caution must be exercised.
For in the work of this chapter there occurs often the evacuation of blood upon opening a vein, and incision over an abscess, as well as treatments for wounds, extraction of arrows, incision into stones, and such things; where there is doubt and fear, resulting in many deaths.
And I warn you not to rush headlong into folly. For there are many ways in which people approach treatments. If they come from those who have so recklessly faced their disease that they died easily due to the remedy's effect, and from the severity of their ailment; and one must be wary of such cases. And among these is one who gives up his senses, and says: "Wait, I am injured"; and the patient is resentful. It does not suit you to agree with those who come to you with this manner, but place greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not hastily resort to measures of which you are certain and have taken counsel; make use of prognostication and indication in the treatment of your sickly ones so that health may be converted; and this shall assist you in acheiving good reputation, glory, and memory for the kingdom.
Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and honesty, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this treatise by sections as the chapter of cauterizations is discussed, from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
Full head of water
Maladies that often occur in children during birth and when the womb is excessively strained, and there are occasions where no solution can be found.
And I have never seen this disease occur in anyone other than children, and among those I have observed it has always been fatal; therefore, I believe my efforts are best invested in the specific treatments discussed earlier.
e (Issie tiel que au ple;molard fle the mo viene and ce qu�turlemente l’s
If moisture is greatly increased, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
And if moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see are openings at the corners of each part, and the vein bursts when pressed by your hand deep within, and it has not been reset: then one must make three incisions as follows:
After the incision and bind the wounds and veins and oint with oil, and leave until it is dry; and let the member be bound up as long as to keep in two days. And after, and then retenez leder laine aloier constricta ire aile funt li moistor estraints et si tu les veuele le chief ne puent la plaie de d’or; ou li cest lou chief oint et contermoient torsuat il mett lechief of retenir.
And another way of incision is to observe where the head of the abscess lies and its water collection; for it is never in front, never behind, never on the right, nor ever on the left.
So cut at the place where the abscess head lies and its water collection is present, following as far as your ability allows; and be careful not to injure an artery; ensure that blood flows from it, so that the patient may die from the progression of blood loss and fluid evacuation.
For resuming
When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and the illness is long-standing, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort of care is the cautery with which one cauterizes the two arteries.
Thus, when you cauterize the arteries, it is necessary for the patient to raise their head; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, after which extract them one by one using a full cloth; then observe where the veins lie, and both eyes will be behind each ear, not much protruded; then mark the edges of the eyebrows, then cauterize each with a sharp spatula piece twice as wide until it reaches the bone beneath.
And if you see them, place the sharp spatula under the artery and cauterize it above by cutting as with two parallel cuts.
When the vein is opened, a continuous stream of blood flows from it.
And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you must measure a space of three fingers in length, then insert and push until reaching the bone; and that which is needed to put through the blood vessel is five grains (approximately 302 milligrangs), with perhaps a little more or less. Depending on what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains atop the bone without causing great pain, when you cauterize, let nothing come out, then strain the wound and tie it off, and apply ointment until healed.
To cleanse or wash away impurities.
When an early form of gout appears, and acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old headache with similar things occur, and it is treated by various methods of medical remedies but nothing helps, then we extract the arteries from the temples and perform cauterization, as we have discussed.
And the method of extracting them is such that the patient grows hair on his temples, and hears an opening in the artery within the temple, as it opens well from its pulsation, and it is not fully closed like in some people who are too cold; if it closes, the patient should wear a bandage of some kind for a while, then rub the area with an abrasive cloth, and apply warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula as follows:
Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it open with tweezebrushes, and separate well with towels that are around each part; and if the artery is delicate, twist it at the tip of the pincer, then seal that part according to the amount of two hairs. For if it's not sealed, all infection will occur.
And treat the wound with blood for 7 days until it is healed; and if the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and fresh bleeding occurs from the area between the threads at the same time; then remove any excess flesh between the two ties, and then if necessary cauterize up to the bone until the head is severed; this is the healing operation, provided that the patient does not have a fever and they are of hot constitution.
For the cautery is aid in finishing the inflammations: for that's why it is more useful to inflammation. And for the extraction of arteries: fill the cavity with old cotton and well-made bands; and when they are removed, treat it with dry medicines that induce heat, and bandages until it is sound; and if you find a cut in the artery as much as thou dost work there, then haste to cauterize the cavity by cautery, or employ thy hand's strength, so that the wound be sealed. And if thou hast no such thing, place on it until the wound is frozen, and moisten with cold water as long as the wound remains unsealed; and bind firmly as it should. The treatment of extracting arteries is more effective when cauterize the incision by sharp cautery cutting blade twice parts, but the sharpness be well to maintain longer. When inflammations are too persistent, it retains less heat. And it must have between the two knives a space as wide as one, and then when you start to tie them together with the thread, and keep the iron hot until it reaches the bone, cleanse the vein in two places; and be distanced apart by the two eyes because this cautery is not wholly effective at all; and here is the form of the cautery:
Of tears
mainme t
And they called it the "ancient cure for bruises", and you should do to the patient who has this disease: let his hair be on the forehead, then make three incisions or equal length according to the width of the forehead; and one incision is as two fingers all along above until the eyebrow, and the other two are each two lengths from the glabella, and take care not to cut the arteries that are on the two sides at the level of the eyebrows; and move your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, with each wound being equal in length to three fingers across.
and from the incision that is towards the second incision; then scrape off all flesh that lies between the two incisions up to the suture of bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
If inserted into the first opening is an instrument called "cullet", which on one side is very sharp and on the other side is smooth, not cutting. And insert the knife cutting towards the wind arse at the bone, and the smooth side toward the bone, inserting as far as it reaches the middle opening. Then cut off all veins that branch out from the eyes until the incision is continuous to where one opens the eye, then continue in the middle opening to the other end; then draw blood equally, expressing the leu for collected blood; then place a tent of old cotton in each fissure and cover with dampened cloths soaked in wine, oil, and herbs, ensuring that abscesses do not form. After three days, remove the ligature, apply plentiful application of cold water tea, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, along with other remedies used for wounds until healed.
For the eyesight of the eyes
When any come with acute catarrh as usual, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakened sight, and burning of the papillae; and the hairs fall out, and at the forehead there is great pain, and feverish sweating; then from these incidents you know that those matters and such catarrhs do not come only from many veins, and the mucus cure where it is.
And it is that you command the patient to lift his forehead, then make a large incision near the forehead and another wide one; starting from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, until reaching bone; and keep your hands away from the nerves of the temps when they move during eating. And once the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood onto a sponge, then wrap between the two edges of the incision with cotton wool; then cover it with bandages soaked in wine and oil, and prevent pus formation; once healed, rub the bone until hair begins to grow, then treat it with things that promote regeneration.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts tincture of opium, and prepare it with fire; and administer to these wounds to promote healing throughout the entire area.
Of ear blockage
All that comes out of the ears is one of four things: grains, or beast, or stones from mine, or similar matter like iron; or seed, as if it were seeds, peas, beans; or substances flowing as water and easily passing through, such matters.
When it exits through the ear stone or in another manner of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows within the ear, place the ear in warmth. If you see a stone, distill some small amount of violet oil or sage oil, then make an extraction; and if there is sneezing as a condition, plug the nostrils when sneezes occur, and place cloths or wool around the ear; elevate the ear above. Often healing comes from this treatment; and if it does not come forth, instruct extraction with fine forceps, of which here is the form:
If it exits through the forceps, that is good; if not, make extraection with fine double-ended pincers; and if it does not exit thusly, create a small needle and insert its head or aperture into the ear firmly so nothing can enter with the needle; then healing occurs as we have said often. And if it does not come forth in this manner, take pitch like birds do, place some cotton inside, then use any sharp instrument suitable for the task, and press the pitch onto the stone or whatever is there; afterwards, extract normally. If it does not come les arriere fai diz estropes en la ceu nule tene li leu isi que tu veine de lis eus li ointre les malaid, puis la oreille a ceste au sole il ynentrescuers. And if it is a bone that has come through and swells, then perform an extraction; and if it cannot be removed, then apply a small cloth subtly according to this method:
And perform an incision on that bone. But do not attempt this when you think the bone is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made numerous attempts; then extract it gently with pincers and a suction device as we have mentioned, so that the extractions are successful.
Thus, if the patient needs to sneeze from the initial condition, fill the ear with old cotton and keep it in place on that same ear where the moisture is present; if it falls out, that'cuh good. If not, take numerous pieces according to the length of your needle threads lightly weighted down, heat them slightly, and then put a piece in the patient's ear, allowing some to hang off on one side, and fix another piece at the site where there is moisture; do this from pinch to pinch until all the fluid comes out completely, as we have described for stones. If you see any sign of discharge, take a piece of string and insert it into the ear until it catches fire, then extinguish it with smoke until the thinner end is burned; after that, replace it with other pieces until all the fluid has drained out as we have described for stones.
In the removal of animals, if they are small like fleas and such things, treat as we have said in division; but if they are large to be felt, arrange for extraction with tweezers; and it is easier to remove those that are in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from ears, when you treat them as we have said in division and deal with distillations, if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight; if any worms are present, use delicate tweezebrought, and if none appear, take the cure of bezoars that are found there.
And it is narrow below and wide above. Then place the finer part of your tool in the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient has; then make every effort as much as all the worms come out. And if they do not emerge, stuff around the caine with cotton as I have said in piercing; and if they still don't exit like we have mentioned, arrange for distillations that the ancients have tried in the excision of worms, and you will find them or deal with distillations; and distil oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument as is described by its form:
And it is of silver or copper made outside through small holes, and on top for distillation purposes; and to press within the distillation use an instrument well-made from copper, if you see a cloth wrap around the point promptly with cotton; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines into the pan, so that it be in the ear; then put all the cotton inside the wad, and press with your warm hand until the oil is distilled or dripping from the ear; and the patient smells within, and the distillation is a small bowl over fire just as it is distilled into the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good if it were.
Of plugging in the ears
No child is born without any hairs in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by plugging of a wound or a speck inside the ear, and these pluggings come at times fully into the ear, so that one cannot see them; and sometimes it does not happen .i. peacone lou pertus, and the sees well.
When it comes from the front and cannot be seen, there is grave healing in various conditions, and in that which one sees, you must place the ear of the patient towards the sun; then look inside. If you see apparent inflammation, so the work has affected this entire area of tissue where the form is:
And it is both above and below plainly, if it does not affect the ear; if the inflammaturism is of honey or body parts of the ear, take with subtle pincerings gently until all that has been affected is completely cured.
And if the inflammaturism is from the front in the ear, take a subtle razor and warm it slightly by fire, then apply to the body parts of the ear. If you feel that the patient feels great anxiety upon hearing it, gently perforate but do not burden the nerves of the ear; then place a tent according to the width of the hole in ointment with Egyptian wax.
On any day as long as the wound is swollen, take a tent and mix in powdered alum and rosewater, and if you see an inflamed ear, it's fitting to replace the tent with another one made of rosemary oil and beeswax until the inflammation subsides; then treat it as long as it becomes healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and wrap it in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other remedies to address the blood loss that involve treatments such as distillations.
From paper burns
The disease comes from the nails when they are wet and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and forceps, and tie off a piece of their roots; then apply vitriol paste on the spot.
And if the corrosion is not removed, you should cauterize with a fine cylindrical caustic and let it be moved after incision; many times they are repaired as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots become burnt and do not return.
From the grease
Many times come from the eyes things that appear like hail in their shape and hardness, and thus this illness is called "grandine", consisting of a large amount of moisture above and below the paper; its treatments are as follows: be careful if grandine moves on one side or another, and it's an easy matter to know; then make the cut wide, then scrape off each part lightly, then grasp with tweezeburners, and bind. If you cannot cover without piercing a bit of paper, nothing harms the patient; if the fissure is large, assemble them in one stitch, and heal until it's healthy; if it's small, do not exert force, as the ointments will soon soften and ease pain.
And if the grandine is descending into the inner ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper and use tweezeburners to grasp it, bind and press on both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, nothing harms; and once the grandine is healed, wash with salt water, and cure the area causing pain until the patient is healthy.
We'll translate this as follows: "And after it causes sores to cleanse the wounds." However, it seems incomplete or unclear due to a possible error in translation; please provide context for clarification. Please confirm with assistance. If necessary clarify whether retry if needed.
A grease arises in sheets upon paper, occurring more often in children than in adults, grieves them greatly, and brings tears to their eyes by morning; they cannot look at sunlight because the tears rush to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces for rest, sleep with wet cheeks that swell up from the grease seeping into the oil. And when you press upon the area with your thumbs and feel it oozing out.
The method of treatment is that the patient places their head in your hands; then take a linen cloth and make it into a circle according to the amount contained by the grease from each part, place it over them; press with both thumbs on either side so the greebly assembles within the circle. Then create a small cut in the middle of the moisture-filled area not larger than the vein wound made earlier; and work the skin until you reach the grease underneath; and from various positions, grease comes out through the cut as white fat pieces.
Extract the entire piece of cloth between your thumbs and turn it to the right and left until dispersed; ensure you do not block in the cut, that you reach all the way through the vein down to the oil without cutting off too much.
And if the nerves do not open at the beginning of the tear, gently widen the tear until it appears; then extract as we have said, and moisten with linen and water, and place on a bed, and bind with bandages.
And for those who grind seeds and put them on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then heal until it is healthy again. And if an abscess comes at the wound site, then cure with emollients soothing until it becomes healthy again.
Of hair paper. (This phrase seems out of context and may not have a clear translation in this text.)
When hairs appear on paper in a way other than their nature and are aged, they harm the eyes and bring about methods of diseases such as accustomed tears, softening of papers, and albugine until it causes destruction; and there is treatment according to four ways: by cautery with fire together, or by medicinal ague as mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suture or by cantharides, as I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper over with your left hand; if it turns well, it's good; if not, insert a needle into every thread on top; and be just below the margin of the paper or where hair grows near these hairs, and pull through one thread across all the paper, turning it towards the edge; then remove from undernee the part of the paper, away from the dislocated hairs, over the entire surface excepting between the large eyebrow to the small one; then extract a thread, and place beneath the paper a small tent made of cotton and linen cloth; also place above the paper an impression like that of a bellows, as in mistletoe, and it is necessary that the imprint be according to the quantity you see raised on all sides.
IIII. Filz les fil and li dons apresme le s’en .ii.li paign't plysaint biaus en dechief jespeigne souloe duleau lou ce est lourles c’est la maint la orneque.
And if in another manner: and it is that you hold the paper of a shape which is similar to the reed of myrtle, as we have explained, III inches away depending on the form shown here:
Then join what rises from small equal forces according to the shape shown here:
And if you cannot hold the tongs, and things are not equal, then take an awl or one with thread, and tie it in the middle of the figure; and another thread near the large corner, and the second thread near the small, and evenly place between your two threads; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the leather under which you have tied, as we have explained, then join the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure until it is healthy again; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments.
Sometimes the hair of the paper is transformed: if it occurs, you must use what we have said about making an incision; but the cauterization on either side is more artificial.
The treatment of this type is as follows: and that you transform the paper and fold it inward according to what I have said, and then make .ij. (two) holes by artifice, and two fine ligatures as long as the paper width and the spatula's breadth; and bind the fingers of the hands with .ij. (two) parts so that you hold the threads; then join one and the other subtly beneath what protrudes from the oil on the paper, and strain the two cords from the two pieces properly; and leave it thus for several days, and the skin which is stretched will die and heal and become supple, as long as it stretches by itself.
If it is delayed and the binding needs to be strengthened, then continue treatment until it becomes healthy again; and when the wound is closed quickly, and the paper has risen so that hairs can no longer grow on it; and this is the form of the .ij. (two) ligatures you will make according to this figure, and in this quantity of length and width:
First of all, take a fine needle and thread some thin silk thread through it; then join the head and carefully align both delicately, ensuring the length of the threads is about an open hand's width; next arrange in order another short piece of thin silk thread quickly, and thread the heads with this new filament; then place the patient’s head on your platform so that the procedure can be clearly seen, as it is a delicate and minute operation; insert the needle through the entire length to the root of the hair adjacent, and cut the paper hastily while you slide it over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the sheath, and thread that hair into the sheath if there are one or two or three or several; then remove your hand so that the threads appear aligned with the natural hair on the paper.
And if the sheath is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will tease the sheath apart from all the thread that you have arranged, until the sheath appears to be pulled through and can be seen by oil; then again you will tease the sheath and the filament, leaving two or three days or three, as long as the hair grows in its place and a tuft of hair forms; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural lock with it, raise it up until it is separated and then let it down.
And to oil be sheath and lesse tee oil as by ate tu loin sheeth and uncoif the sheath are of hairs to heal so long, se loishe unlock telleth oint eul. Seize it is one lock and they shall you will not to te sheath unle: And be shewist de teoils three a leu ou c, then let la chouls the leslie with li leslde long lesse tu hairs soflesh lois anoint at ores. Let it is oil as the blood and se they are they shall come and of oil in to heels be sheath after if the lips them And teeth deo they hairl teeth d, butter the lick oils sheoul:them too long oules then two te la.
When the disease called "aleacrati" or infection occurs in the body, it has two manners: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens through sudden wounds, cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the manner of treatment is to split that suture, separate its edges, and place lint inside until it heals; do not use anything drying or constricting in its care. Because if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but by using things softening like fenugreek, and a decoction of water or vinegar with linseed, and oils mixed with any one of these ointments, wrap it around the wound, and treat with that.
And the essence of your treatment is to ensure that it does not heal in its original form; and these treatments we have mentioned are only for addressing this disease so that it does not return as it was before.
From the chariot coming into the joint
This disease called "axacrati," is both natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; the method of treatment involves you taking a needle with a double thread, inserting it into a hole in the wheel, piercing through to the right side so that the threads reach two points on the wheel; then they pull the wheel up using all the needles and tying off at one place.
And if the shape of the membrane returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a razor and insert it into the fissure, then twist the membrane, making two fissures within the membebrane; the wheels at the ends of the incision you made shall have their angles aligned with those of the two fissures so when they are joined together, they resemble a letter 'G'; then remove that wheel according to its size and how it fits into the membrane, joining the separated parts with a thread; care for it as we've mentioned using softening medicines and bandages until healed.
And if the disease comes from a tear or stitching or cautery, it is necessary to make a clean incision below the hairline of the scalp, and according to what has been said before; then between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters prepare all possible means so that it may return to its natural figure; and also in cases where patients need treatment and remedies in various positions.
The binding of the scalp.
When this binding occurs in such a manner that the scalp above is sealed with its white wax, and it cannot move or perform its natural actions, then you must insert the tip of a razor below the scalp, and lift it up; and do so at the edges, as long as you scrape off what is near the subtil spatula, which should not be too coarse nor too sharp, so that the patient does not endure that the spatula scrapes too hard or softens the wax. And make your incision, carefully removing the adhesion, gently, allowing the scalp to return to its natural form; and it is well healed, and apply nothing in the oil mixed with water, but rather use clean water, then warm water; then place a linen tent between the scalp and the wax, and cover the scalp.
Of the nail of the foot
It is said that the nail has two manners: one nervous and appearing as a hard swelling, and another which is not nervous but appears like frozen moisture on bone; when touched with iron and cooked over embers, it cannot move. Both appearances begin near the great ridge, and grow slowly until they cover all vision and light movement of the foot.
The manner of incision is that the patient places their head in pain, then you work with tweezamoins; remove the paper to your hand, then grip the nail at its base with small tweezers and pull upwards; then take a needle, and insert a single hair from horse, sheep, or ox, along with strong thread. Double the tip of the needle slightly and pierce it through the entire needle length, tie the nail to one side with string, and pull the other way, scrape away all fur from the edge of the nail that touches the skin to the end of its shaft and along the underside until you reach the apex, then cut off any remaining at the base of the ridge and the subtlety and fine strands, leaving the natural or ridge; such that through this incision does not produce usual tears in the body. And never is extended to the second toe only, but with thread, as we have said:
And ensure that the spatula does not touch and tear the flesh towel, and that the prunelle is not perforated; after making an incision, pour some boiled sealing wax into it, and with a collar made of litargire, leave it until the following day; then treat as needed for it to become healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle into it, and the hooks do not enter, this resemblance of a fingernail has often been treated with medicines; they arise as I described in the section, and if you see them covered, work on the patient's side with a light spatula according to this method:
And carefully lift the nail, and if you see that it does not diminish and there is a rash afterward, distill from your mouth into the litargire collar and red wool and sealing wax mixture, and cover it until the following day; then resume the other procedure of this same work, as long as it becomes entirely healed.
If nothing is against you in this regard as abscesses do, then first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, and resume the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of flesh at the shin causes great harm in that region, suspend an oncinous bandage and apply it only partially, not all over; then let red-colored oil drip into the area from a mixture of lead.
From the powder which forms under the eyelid
Some men are afflicted with redness in the groin area, covering it and binding above the hairline and twisting at the base, resembling a balustrate rose; the procedures involve having the patient lower their head to his knees, then working on the eyes, and following that all around as needed, and supporting them with force. Then cut the first one, shaving it completely until finished, enscribing care not to irritate the operated area; thereafter make an incision similar to what we have described in the nail cutting technique and other minor forces used for removing lashes, as demonstrated by the aftermath of this treatment.
After the incision is completed and all hairs are removed, apply oil from a broom or distill red wax and similar corrosive medicines onto it; then place cotton soaked in egg whites if you ensure no bleeding occurs. If there's nothing left to remove, let the area heal naturally, and if doubts arise about heat-induced sores, leave the oil and treat the inflammation with soothing substances; resume your procedure as soon as it is safe, following this approach for hairs that remain in place.
But also, you must carefully treat the wound from each oil of the body; and apply them as soon that you can be healed, and do not touch it again as much. And if accidental injuries are found within these members: de la oinz est celi; et ys, l’oeil en tout que tu poins ou toes d'autres leu les os eit, et li oil s'en esoie est a ceint li choses in the voiretee d'et esproveillos de oin. Et ses est, si la pains les l’oeil.
From the veins of the eyes
Thus are red veins that cover the eye, and they affect its function and weaken the eyes every day. Therefore, when you look with your eyes in which sebel is, there is also a protrusion; there is no other disease besides this sebil. Then you should treat it thus: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then gently compress those veins all around according to your wisdom, and let the small veins be subtly doubled in such a manner:
And there are two veins per degree as follows, one for each side according to this form:
Then you gently coax the veins out, and draw a small amount of blood after each time you see them removed; and ensure that you do not bleed the oil at the tip of the spatulae, and perform this procedure in the hour before noon when facing the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that only the veins are bled; and once you have done this, let it trickle into the jugular vein red and green to corrupt what is lodged there.
And if you cannot extract all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave them uncovered until the pain is relieved and assured there are no burns, then resume as before until healed; this is their strength.
Of the jugular vein.
The mirs are called "arissati" furuncles: when you treat it with fire cautery and by using hot medicinal water as previously mentioned, if it is not healed, then create an opening above the abscess where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see decay and blackness, return to using all of the instrument as shown in its form; it will be called "aspre chief", consisting of hair from one of the tools described, sharpened like a file in this present shape:
And place it on the exposed bone and turn it with both hands, pressing your hand a bit until you know that the decay is removed; do this as needed, then restore the site with healing ointments.
If the joint is dislocated and blood appears, and the body of the bowel is dislocated, and remains so for 40 days, and does not heal or become an abscess, if there are no complications, it may be safe; otherwise, there is no other remedy than to reset the fistula towards the nose near the forehead in this way: and ensure that you open the bone a second time with iron and medicinal acids, and when it's opened up take a plug according to this method, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft should be thinned down to the top as shown here.
Then place it on the bone near the temple, and move your hand away from its eye a little, then turn the plug completely through until it pierces the bebone and you feel the patient's pain as they hold their hand by their nose; then restore the bone with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when blood appears and hardens at the joint, let the matter go to the nose; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
From the exit of the eye
When the limbs are fully extended and there is no sign of dislocation or narrowing, it is necessary to bind the patient; then apply a tourniquet, then attach bladders that do not cause pain when sucked out, then place oil with a band made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla; strain the oil, and wrap in cloths from below. The arrangement of the cloths should be such that you use soft enough cloths, doubling each one into four, then place one over another according to the amount needed by the limb; then strain it using a stiff bandage, and restart with bladders without causing pain when sucking; then remove the bladders and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the ligament becomes softened sufficiently, then carefully straighten it out; then remove the ligament after one day and night, and if you see the oil returning, that is good; otherwise, restart with the cloths, ligament, bandages, and bladders until healed.
The undoing of torn fabric
d’est a la peus lesielles. The ploved le cue ce, et ego, puis que tu ; les est lien; Enlors avons tuit; lou maz desrize chert lite; qui lier; liqueset; Etre de l’t il; pour les autres vignes.
And if the eyes have a significant appearance, puncture at the subtle spatulum that comes from the oil, allowing the white moist matter to descend and enter quickly between them; then extract until they are separated properly.
From the bow of the oil
This disease called "alcunnati" is not anything but a bow that comes together in the oil, appearing as if it's water flowing downwards, but it is not; and the way to treat this condition is for you to make the patient sit on a chair properly positioned and straightened up, then take his head between your hands from two sides, and observe until you see the bow coming above their eyes; then insert gently, and do not let the light descend and look at the things as it usually should. If they do not come down, understand that it is water, and if the assembly of this bow has not been prepared in the way we have described, make the patient sit between your hands again, then take a subtle spatula and press upon the corneal tissue with the continuous conjunctive tissue and crown, until the bow is formed; when it is formed, distill into warm honeyed water or water or fenugreek boiled and mixed with miel, then cure in another manner until it heals properly.
From the waters of oil
From the waters of oil, we have observed similarities in its division; and that which is to be cut according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, crooked away from light and sunlight, and let them apply holy oil strongly and tightly; then place the paper with oil on your left hand if the eyes are left-sided or on your right hand if they are right-sided; then take in your right hand (if the eyes are left-sided) the instrument called "almagda," or with your left hand (if the eyes are right-sided); then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by a slight scratch on the edge of the oil at the lower outer corner, and insert the almagda firmly, and twist your hand until it pierces through the paper, and sense that the almagnida is reaching the empty space; and it must be ensured that the pathway of the almagna is from the beginning to the end of the measured area extending up to the prunele (a unit of measure); this is the crown of the oil. And you will see the bone in the paper for its transparent sclerotic layer, and then place the instrument at that point or where it is filled, then express it after another vein. If the aqueous humor drains now, he can see the patient before him and the instrument in his eye oil.
After resting a little and the aqueous humor rises on the second pathway, place the force with the instrument (almagda), and when it is inserted well and does not rise further, gently twist almagnida around your hand a bit at a time; then return some of the holy oil to the eye. Then put soaked oil or woolen cloth in oil-soaked and abundant with oil, mix it with holy oil. We, and those who are from our times, we apply compresses covered with an abundance of oil.
And if the maggots cannot enter the flesh due to its hardness, for there are some men with very hard hairs, it is necessary to use an instrument called "alberit", of which here is the form:
Therefore pierce the conjunctiva only slightly and not too deeply, but make it just subtle enough, then put in maggots as we have said; at the completion of the work provide for the sick man an appropriate pillow so he sleeps with one on his back in a dimly lit place; and be free from all movements, and feed him light foods, and do not move his head to either side, and tie him up according to his condition until the third day; then remove him from that same dark room, test his vision, let him see various things, and then restore the ligature for another week; it is not necessary to perform this while giving treatment or immediately after incision now, but do so afterwards because the humors rise quickly.
If abscesses come out, that you remove the bandage before the seventh day and apply what soothes the abscess wound; and when it is calmed down, if you uncover his face with a patch for at least one day, then let him stay in that dark room. And then take him gradually out of the dimly lit place, and allow him to resume normal activities; and know that no apprentices should interfere in this case.
A certain man came to us from Yrach and told us that in our region there are seen maggots causing water blisters, although I have never seen any here on our land nor read of them in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And they are the likenesses of maggot forms, for those who do not recognize them see only that. They are like worms properly:
And their heads from this same subtlety are pointed, and the latter in three sharp angles.
From the cartilage of the nose to the forehead
Never do nose cartilages of various kinds appear or have piercings like scorpions at the height; and if there are such where it has a flush color or is off-color from bone color. In those cases where they are off-color but not flush, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; work on their nostrils, and pour liquid into them, and twist the threads; then take care to support it as delicately as possible with a subtle hook until you know that all of the cartilage is ossified.
And if there remains any part that cannot be covered, try all delicate sutures; and if nothing stays in place, or swelling occurs, cut as it should be; and if malignant abscesses are present, hurry to cauterize them until they become sealed and the cartilages have ossified completely, then pour oil of larch or water with wine.
If the treatment fails and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is sane; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, understand there's charcoal in the bone above, where inflammaturms do not come for cutting. Then it must be ensured that you tie a piece of linen thread somewhat thick, which we handle with hands, leaving space between each one; place the patient's head under the filament as far as possible, and pull gently until it emerges from within the mouth; this is done often for children in schools, and it's an easy task for those who are willing to do so. Hold the upper jaw with one hand and the lower jaw with the other, feeling each alternately like our filaments. Do this as long as you know that we have corrupted the charcoal; then extract the thread, drain the blood, moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and return it to its place on the neck as before; repeat for three or more days until the ointments dissolve all that remains of the charcoal. Then tie a bandage around the neck for several days until it is sane again, and if needed use dried medicines; this method purifies the head where one distills oil and medicine into the neck from which we speak.
And it should be made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp like a vessel, and conduct as such; and if you see soot, make a closed vessel for purging the head, and place the head within to absorb substances; have one hand under the head while heating oil or any liquid.
what is done:
Many times arises in the head of the neck a disease called "telul," which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; therefore, it is necessary that you cut at the beginning, and the bone quite hard, then place on fire or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting until it becomes large, be watchful if it is hard, of fleeing color, of poor sense: do not touch with iron as it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is from severe pain, not of fleeing color, and you see that it can be fully covered, then drain the patient and cut without fear, and treat dry and constricting things.
When the neck is cut and sutured
When solutions of continuation arise in one of these cartilaginous structures; and it profits little, even if it happens to some people. Therefore, check whether or not as this occurs as any of them heals, so that you assemble the wounds; and then stitch with sutures all along until they are healthy; and if the edges are torn apart from both parts, and the stitches with a threaded, and apply bloodsticking, and applying paste, and pasted with of blood, then applies paste.
The way of suturing is to assemble the thread: with needles, as we have said in the abdominal wound treatment; or with thread, as I have shown you.
Treatment for abscesses on the lips
When abscesses on the lips occur that are hard like grains of pepper, small and large; then it is necessary to cut the lips apart, make an incision under each nerve, take them with tweezebrought out in each part; afterwards soak the wound after applying vitriol ointment until it heals; and then apply a healing herb poultice, and treat the area of dried things until it is healthy.
From the root of the gums
Many times it arises on the gums with inflammation, which the ancients called 'albulus'; thus, you must support it with forceps, and cut to its root, allowing bleeding or blood flow; then apply vitriol paste or other drying powders thereon; if after incision, it often recurs, and is cauterized again, but does not return following the cautery; these are measures for treatment.
of sorenesses
s;te la crovely;
When treating a toothache, one must wait as long as possible before pulling it, for it should not be done hastily; for it is a matter of great importance up until there is no excuse to extract. Then when the patient is constrained to extract a tooth, it must be done only after being certain of the aching one. Often does the pain trouble the patient before extraction, and they believe it to be a healthy tooth and extract the wrong one; but in any case, the pain persists until the evil is removed, as we have already tried with these patients; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, make sure to scrape thoroughly around the tooth with a strong spatula so that all parts of the gum are protected. Then move it carefully using your fingers or fine pliers at first gradually until they are perfectly aligned, then firmly secure the pincers; and keep the head of the shoulder in its proper place between your knees.
After extracting the tooth correctly without any breakage, if it does not fall out, take one of these ointments and rub them inside on all sides gently, and move it as you did before. And if the root is pierced and infected, you must fill it with a cloth where the holes are; and carefully pull it out using fine pincers so that it does not break while extracting; and work very skillfully around the gums to dislodge the tooth.
Ensure it is not broken and retain a part of it, causing greater pain to the patient due to its proximity to the root. Be aware that you should not act as ignorant surgeons do, who break the cartilage hastily without care or consideration for our advice; rather, they often bring about great disease through their incautious actions affecting both roots and broken cartilage, as we have seen frequently. And when the disc is torn, wash the area with wine or herbs mixed with salt; if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply a poultice of vitriol paste; if this proves ineffective, cauterize it.
The shapes of the tendons, to which you will attach the first bone, are at sharp points and large knobs, without doubling when pulling the teeth. And these are the forms:
They should be of large bones such that they do not break during extraction, and made of iron well-forged, with teeth to hold them firmly in place.
From the root of the teeth When the root remains exposed to touching, it is necessary that you place cotton wool dipped in butter at its location for one or two days until the bone feels smoothed. Then apply the pincers called 'algefri', so that the head appears like a bird's beak; and within them are made similar to a file, which shapes it:
And if the roots do not come out with all these pincers, it is necessary to reveal the entire cartilage around the root and apply the instrument called 'althali', that is, forceps; which gives its shape.
man’s.
And if you use this instrument which has two heads, here is its form:
and other tools used for treating fractures of the bones, and this instrument which resembles large pliers, here is its form:
And be these instruments so they cannot break; and know that there are many tools for treating bone fractures; and other instruments too which are not counted among them; and the wise masters ingeniously use their instrument themselves, according to what their works and diseases show him, because there are some types of diseases where the ancients did not teach any tool due to the diversity of cases. And does not break on his limb or other bones which he searches for instruments that you have said, and helps in gestures, here is its form: And they should be large and well held to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can keep and remove; then restore its original position with suitable medicines for this purpose, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, use all of this instrument.
When the tooth appears not according to natural form and its shape is unattractive, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the nerve remains after the tooth, and it's not on the correct side, and cannot be soaked or filed down; then scrape it. And if it is sharp with the toaster, use this instrument whose form is shown here, resembling a small beak, made of iron finely sharpened at one end:
And hold the file lightly and carefully for a long time due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move other teeth; if it appears that one can be filed down, use this part of the file as shown by its shape.
It is also like the sharpening of a gimlet; and as with a gimlet's teeth that one sharpens little by little day after day until it cuts; then in the end there will be no resistance at all, and if its point is too sharp and it nips the tongue, it must be smoothed down so it becomes even, so that it neither bites the tongue nor corrupts speech.
When teeth are loose
When teeth become loose due to impact or by falling out and the patient is unable to press on what they are chewing so that it does not fall out, and you have cared for them with restraining medicines which do not work; if necessary, they must be bound with a gold wire because silver wires turn green and decay, but gold never changes. The wire should be of medium thickness according to the space between the teeth. If you see that the roots need straightening, take the wire and double it over both healthy teeth until you find the other side's healthy tooth; then continue wrapping up to where you began, and gradually pull your hand subtly and gently so they do not move; make sure there is a tight fit at the root of the tooth. Then cut off the wire with pliers, and reattach them, placing them between the healthabundiau. Leave it as tight as it can stay, and if it comes loose or breaks, then tie it with another wire; if it lasts and serves until its time is done, and this is how:
And when the tooth falls out, it is reset in its place again and again as we have said; only those who are wise and patient should do this, never forming the shape of a wax seal impression of bone, placing it back where the deficiency lies, holding it firmly as we have said, remaining long-term.
And for the tie on the tongue's ligament.
And never is this type of tie that comes from the tongue or nature, such as we do not create it thus; nor accidentally from burns. The procedures are such that you work on the patient's mouth with a fistula, and have his head held straight, and lift the tongue; then cut the nerve-ligament broadly, until the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, it is of sudden wound healing, so apply the hook and cut broadly, but not too widely near the artery underneath; and when you have done this, raise a rose water compress or cold water pad on top, then put a linen bandage over the tongue; each night rub the patient's eyes until they can close. And if discharge of blood appears, apply sulfur paste there; and if it fails to take hold, cauterize with lentigineous caustic iron, which is good for this purpose; then continue other treatments until healed.
If you see it is of black or hard color and the patient does not feel it, do not touch as it is cancer; if it is leaning towards a bladder, and there is moisture present, pour onion juice upon it, which causes an odor, and free it from all sides; and if you manage to overcome it with your treatment, apply mercury powder until it becomes inactive, then return to the treatment as long as you need to address everything; then raise the lump easily and completely, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
For throat abscesses
For throat abscesses and what are called "godath," and they are properly the two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they do not heal; so take care: if it is a small and light-colored abscess, do not touch it with iron. And if it's red and its root is large, do not touch it with iron; but also for the bleeding of blood; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will cut it off or it will break on its own; and if it is pale color, and its roots are delicate, prepare the instrument to cover, but first look carefully whether the abscesses rests relaxed and sooth calmed. Then make sit the patient before the sun, and his head and mouth and press with his thumb between the fingers of your hand, as this form; and is silver or steel like knife:
Can you press the tongue with this instrument and see the abscess? Take a needle and insert it into the head, then pull upward more than you can; and apply any dressings needed. Then cap the instrument on top of which is a form that seems like force; the handle is bent, one end to another, very sharp, made of iron or silver wire:
And if you do not have this instrument available, use the clamps which also form a shape.
And take scissors on one side and the other; when you have clamped one of the heads, clamp the other in the same manner, and after making an incision gargle the patient's mouth with warm water, saltwater, and honey solution if any blood flows, then rinse again with either boiled quince rinds or fennel fronds, until it is clean; and cure until healed. If no other abscesses form in the throat besides these two heads, clamp them just as you did the first ones.
And I treated a woman with an abscess deep in her throat, that is to say, a small abscess; and it had been almost entirely closed by the glandular ducts, so that she could not exhale through the passage which was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if this condition persisted for one or two days. The abscesses were such that they had raised up to the point where I could insert two fingers into the two openings of the glandular ducts. Therefore, immediately, I inserted a needle in one opening, then pushed it through until it came out on the other side; next, I removed a large portion of the fibrous tissue; then did the same with the other opening and opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue; afterwards, I inserted a neednose into the abscesses and removed part of them, and there was no bleeding from that. Consequently, the passageways in the woman's throat were cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, not stopping with the treatment for a long time; and the abscesses continued growing back up until they filled the area I had emptied, becoming very large. Then I tricked it and cauterized inside her throat: thus it remained without growth. And I left that region, and only God did anything more about it afterwards.
The term "de l'uve" is an Old French word for the eye or a grape (depending on context). In medical terms, if we are discussing treatment related to eyes, "the eye of someone suffering from inflammaturms" would be a reasonable translation. However, without additional context, it's difficult to provide a precise English equivalent.
ça t. They.
If it has a head or wound where you place the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument over all of the medicine; let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and muscle secretions flow from the mouth into the medicine without going to the throat and stomach; then hold your hand over all of the medicine and press it onto the wound for a quarter hour, until you see dizziness from the medicine subside; and if you notice, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place the instrument into the cotton in the area above, until the cotton adheres to the wound; and do this frequently until the cautery is perfected, then let it dry and fall off after 2 or 3 days. And if you need to restart the cautery with the medicine, do so again, and after the cautery, extract around the wound using cotton wrapped in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and rinse with gargles until healthy.
This treatment is more effective with incision than with cautery; if it is treated by smoking according to this method, take aniseed and wormwood and rue and chamomile and verbena and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them in a jug, let it steep, and boil; then the jug should be well sealed with strong clay, and within the jug there should be an instrument hanging according to this method: of the arse de l’le a se oug comme: ym.
Many times it affects the throat at the bone or spine of a fish, or any other thing; thus, you must examine what is visible and press the tongue toward the sun with all instruments so that you can see the movement; and if nothing opens up in the throat, then you should make the patient vomit until the flesh cooks in the stomnagogue. By chance, if it ejects through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a navel piece, or a lettuce root, or some crust of dry bread; and with the sponge, attach a thread, then transfer it (the foreign object); and when it returns to its original place, you must examine it. If it doesn't come out from what we have described, then take an appropriate instrument:
The inflammation is raised to the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head upward; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, as it may swell or push in the bone within. Move the instrument until the patient puts it there, because this will make the inflammebody move or where the thing is stuck; if they swallow downwards, then you must examine everything completely, as long as it has been moved.
Please exclaim: The throat without any obstruction and no longer remains in the mouth of a spitting. If there are still remain in the mouth; or if they do not remove all the throat does not come out, so it is taken out as follows: And let be removed from the mouth.
At no time is medicine without use, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help at all, then look into the throat of the sick man under the sunlight, after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I told you. And if you see a swelling, treat it with every small pin or with fine pincers as appropriate. And if nothing works, take an earthen vessel filled with water and pour it down the patient's throat, then insert a heated iron into the vessel so often. And if the sick man is stained with water all day, then take full a quart of cold water, use his mouth, and cause him to swallow sensibly, and move his tongue frequently; and as soon as the swelling feels the water, it subsides.
And if it does not subside as we have said, then smolder the sick man with vinegar at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will come without pain. The method of fumigation is such that you take a pot or one containing charcoal powder, and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and through that hole position the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and make the sick man place the end of the cannula in his mouth, and close the mouth so that the smoke does not escape but reaches up to the swelling; and the swelling will now subside, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the sick man suffer thirst, and eat dirty things and sour foods, and drink no water; and then it would be necessary for him to evacuate by this method.
the swelling.
The treaters of abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, as remembered from this and that in this book; they come in two forms: perforation and cutting. The first kind is the same type but due to moisture, while the second kind occurs where there are veins within the body. Abscesses on the head are different than those at the base, and abscesses of joints are different from those that form in joints; each has its own treatment.
And with abscesses that should not be pierced until the bone is dead according to its completion; and if it needs to be pierced when they have grown fully, but do not die upon completion, like those near joints. Because abscessangs that occur near joints are left as long as they remain swollen, in which case the ligament or nerve of the joint may become corrupted due to contraction in that limb. If an abscess is near a principal limb and you delay piercing it until it's fully dead, then harm will come to the main limb; if it's near the base, one should pierce it as soon as it's dead; but do not pierce those which have grown completely without digestion being completed, except for that near the base, so they do not spread outward and become internal fistulas; and they cannot be cured in a short period.
And it is necessary that you know the time of perforating an abscess when it has ripened according to its completion; and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and slight debilitation and sharpening at the head of the abscess, and other signs. It must be that you let the perforation sit or as high up from the abscess as it moved; and it should be a long perforation in accordance with the body, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, or any other similar areas without swelling.
And in those that swell, according to the part of the body affected. And when abscesses are located on fleshly areas, it is appropriate to let perforation occur until digestion has been fully completed, as we have said. Because if you pierce too early, the venom will spread through the body and be filled with much filth; and sometimes the edges harden and become infected. And for any abscess that extends according to the width of the affected part, depending on what the member requires. It is necessary to treat small perforations with small punctures, and large abscessesteemings with large punctures, and many fistulas according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and when it needs to be opened or closed, as they become similar to linen wrappings, and are discharged, then one must proceed like with blisters: and for those that have been split into three angles, or as though being sealed like a reed's bellows; and others that have been made round by cutting.
theg ould ne:l’ que-doze a la mort. The P TT si bon douit.
If bleeding occurs on your wound, treat it with cold and soothing water, and a damp cloth, reapplying many times. And if the bleeding continues, provide proper care and treatment, and apply the powders mentioned in this book, and if it's winter or the place of extraction is very sensitive, then you must wrap warm and moistened linens with wine and hot oil; and if it'eby evening, and the extracted area is fleshy, then cover with damp cloth soaked in cold water or a mixture of vinegar and oil until the third day as we have said; and then remove the bandage and drain fluid and treat, as needed, until healed.
It is essential to know in the treatment of arrow wounds: now I have told you how one should proceed before treating arrow wounds, and this chapter explains it.
About arrows
When small abscesses arise in the head and can be handled like those of a girl's body, there are both greasy and moist ones, as well as hard and pungent ones to cut, without doubt if the tool does not work against them. The treatment for the groin is such that you try with every instrument called "intermedius," from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains. If it contains moisture, then they are removed above long. And when the moisture is drained away, scrape without leaving any hairs containing that moor, for it returns as soon as you leave anything; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment if available, otherwise in water and soap, and apply to the wound until the next day; then remove whatever has formed overnight. And again start with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and so forth, until you are sure it does not remain at night; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until healed. If there is greasy matter in an abscess, apply according to this method along its length; pour drops of vinegar, clean all around, and put on a dressing fitting for that place; if the tool works against you, do as I have told you before. Similarly treat with piercing ones, and hard-to-cut areas and pus drainage as I have said.
And the treatment for piercing and moist abscesses is easier because there's little blood involved. And some of these types of abscesses are like those in an old woman's head that I described earlier, resembling a hard stone, rough, and bluish, which cannot be broken; if one had struck it, they could have made a wound as from a stone. In other abscesse
;t:
Many times, abscesses occur in the neck and below the shoulders, at the joints, and elsewhere, and they are often located close to each other. Each scrofula is properly within its own bone, as we have described for both the scrofula on the head and the cyst itself; there are many similarities between these types of scrofulae. There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malignant and refuse to submit to healthiness. Therefore, in those cases where you see a good disposition at touch, resembling the color of the body, without any swelling on either side and not affecting the veins or arteries, nor being deeply rooted; then it is necessary that you drain from above, peel off each part, and extend the two membranes near the glands as needed, as we have said for cysts in the head; proceed slowly and carefully, ensanguineating but not cutting any nerves or veins, avoiding causing damage to the spatulatum muscle or tearing tissues, so that hands do not slip, and do not go too far without proper indication.
And if you drain the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work further, apply vitriol paste or any powders that remain blood inside, then press the wound; leave it until the abscess subsides, softens, and begins to heal. When there is no more bleeding, return to your practice as long as it needs completion; then look for if there are small scrofulae remaining, which you should remove and cleanse. And if in the root of the scrofula there is a large vein, do not drain that particular scrofula from its base but tie it with a double strong thread and let it hang freely without harm; then treat the wound with fine cotton soaked in Egyptian balm, followed by dressing.
the les que le f
Of quinsace
The ancient ones spoke and talked about the incision of the throat; but I never saw it done in our land, and that is their written word.
For those who have quinsace, it is necessary that the incision of the throat, called "epiglote," be made; and this cannot be helped with it, because all the veins and the main part of the illness are high in those who have abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two amygdales. When the illness is in the channel of the throat, it must be covered with an epiglottis to avoid impending loss from strangling.
Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, it must be divided at about 3 or 4 circles or a small slit crosswise, between the two circles or by the amount of the slit in the sacculus, not into the cartilage.
And those who have such symptoms that are compatible with the division of the epaturate it is not sufficient and they feel very weak as if exhausted.
If the master is fearful, it is necessary to extend the skin of the throat along its entire length, then pierce the flesh until reaching the chin bone; and remove any blood vessels if you see anything, and then close the sack, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the jawbone that has fallen apart at its location and due to loss of voice.
And leaves the open wound exposed for a while.
And when the hour has passed for doubting strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound so that the edge is completely smooth and free from jaggedness; then apply medicines which promote warmth until it becomes healthy.
And if one does this before the throat is completely blocked, and the patient appears near death, with difficulty breathing. Then you should cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through their mouth, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
And therefore the physicians ordered to leave the open wound until the illness has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they commanded to sew the wound and cleanse it until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take a knife, and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe's lower end.
And so I fled to help her, finding her as one already dead.
I examined the wound and found blood coming from it; and indeed that she had not cut veins or arteries but only her throat, and life was flowing out through the injury.
a v. If you do:t is all; the old.
And it happened to the lady not until she was inflamed with voice, and returned afterward to her state of health.
For I say, in the treatment of the epiglottis, there is no fear.
Of the great throat
These hernias are called "throat hernia," and they are large boils with the color of jet, and occur often in women.
and there are two ways: natural, and accidental; where nature does not have a remedy.
The occurrence is of two ways, one resembling fat accumulation and the other like an abscess that arises from our arteries. And there is fear involved, and it does not involve operating on major veins unless it is small, and one tests and seeks to identify all related issues. If you find it as with our flesh, and not to any vein, then treat it like we do ourselves, and deal with the whole head, if there are spots. And examine thoroughly, and treat as it ought to be done, until it is perfectly healed.
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
And there are many ways for us, which I will tell all the similarities:
And therefore one must explain all the differences between them.
I say that an abscess is swelling and fever, as long as the boiling continues, and inflammableness is completed; then the fever and swelling subside.
We do not have fever or pain, but it contains a boil, which is its own pouch and is according to the body's colouring, beginning like silverware, and becomes large.
heu;fleur que ne prou dt the vexcite il estle:<now that he c (or li're quat me. S an expression un it is not so 1. Jare they.
When you come to treat the patient, first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermitting", according to its form or chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about boils is to grab or find it more moist than you see in the boil, and turn your two fingers gradually until you know that the suppuration has felt the core, then according to the size of the boil.
Then extract the intermitting instrument, and be careful so it does not snap.
If moisture runs through the vein, giving it its color as I have described with other abscesses.
And after the interference is removed, if no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then make a cross incision and take hold of the edges with forceps, and lightly scrape off each part while ensuring the area where it lies remains clean.
And if you cannot treat it properly, then cut into pieces so that nothing is left behind.
If left untreated for some time, it often returns to us repeatedly.
If it lingers a bit and causes you no grief, apply the wound with corrosive powders of various kinds, tighten the wounds, put on heating balms for abscesses, and treat other conditions until fully healed.
as many times les temps d’aveughts i is to be it at a couvre; 1 and they are not, s do so the worses te vous must se veisnt: and cannte l'est la cure ond eus;
If the joints are swollen and in opposition or something else, hasten to apply a poultice of vitriol broth, and leave it on for 2 or 3 days until the wound is healed, then let the sanguineous exudation rest; afterwards return to its place as it previously was.
When considering the forms of entwining strumas, there are three types: large and medium and small; and among them, there are three kinds called "albaret," and one called "breb"; and among these, there are three ways: large, medium, and small to encircle abscesses of fistulae.
and are just like the needles used for sorcery, made of citrine crystal, or iron, or silver, and valued as those that are yellow, and are more tested with black lead to surround abscesses of fistulae.
There are three ways of it: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the pores.
The forms of tumors are mostly similar, as seen here: large, medium, and small; and those with two heads in three ways alike.
And if there are knots which have three lobes, and they have them in three ways; and if there are knots with two lobes, and knots of a single lobe only, and they also have three ways; all these types must be treated at their respective locations.
The head of these which are cut is sharp, and among those that only pare down on one side, where the skin is scraped off, so you do not sever the vein or nerve.
And of these inserters are placed in strips, so that the patient does not become aware at the onset of abscesses.
There are three ways to do it: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and it is used only where there are joints such as legs, arms, elbebows, knees, and similar places.
At no time is another small instrument used, similar to splinters of thorns, in this manner to tie off blood:
and it is placed at no time back into its original position where the veins are tied off, and in the arteries, and never returned according to this grand form:
Never do women's breasts swell for men who have begun to be corrupted until they appear like a woman'sexpressible.
J. Then scrape the fatty tissue, and dress the wound with purging powder mixed in honey, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and continue curing until it is healed.
and if the limb is bent downward, it becomes weakened by its size like in women, creating two false ribs above, through two similar splits. so that one is held by the other at the end of both, making the larger line contain the smaller according to this form, from this line G to line B; Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and prepare what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever else is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then it must be that you fill the wound with a cotton pad soaked in corrosive medicine. and leave until it is filled up again and fat returns, then treat it until it heals completely.
Of abscesses of arms and legs
These abscesses that arise from the limbs are types of hard scrofula or lumps containing moisture.
Those that contain moisture must be cut according to this method, from line b. up to line g.: do the same;
And if the abscess is like hard growths of scrofula, make it as we have said in splitting scrofulous lesions, and if the wound opens up again, treat with fire cautery as we have said before.
Incising into the artery
When the artery is opened and the skin is heated above it, thus often abscesses occur, and as well as this happens there's bleeding from veins and abscess.
By A: theyre t; The fact, and her. And when you feel it on your elbebows, there is straining; and if it's from the vein, then reason for absence appears.
It is madness to treat this abscess, especially when it arises from bones and joints and veins or with too much blood, and it is very large. :
: Then work the hips with hooks, and gently part the artery from the tendons until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle through it, and pierce until the opposite side is reached, and secure the artery with a double thread for two lengths, as I have shown you in the removal of the two arteries located in temples;
Then mark the location between the two sutures with an instrument until a small incision is made, and then release the abscess.
And so se ci; bon've and Comt Ist themme loar by his. Then treat with ointment as needed until it heals.
the; Then insert the needle from under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, so that there is a double thread, which you pull from the other side. Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or divide it into one of two parts at both heads of the double thread;
and if you doubt that the threads are not strong enough, then with another needle replace all of the thread from underneath the abscess at the incision of the first neednail, and pull both threads apart into four parts;
Then treat the abscess until the excess subsides, then cut away the excess skin and leave what remains attached.
Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with wound dressings and salves until healed.
Of abscesses of the veins
le lesse they t qu's (tard Marm; The following lines the same heuze: [A-J  J. I.
More often it happens with shoulders and elbangs in all places where there are joints, and this is an abscess, its color resembles the body's own color, and it is in various painful conditions.
And when you forcefully reset them, the patient feels severe pain, and it's not entirely within the body, but from outside.
And move it well in all parts, and neither forward nor backward, nor from below nor above, and those with joint issues should not be bound by iron: perhaps they would contract.
And those whose head or forehead is affected, they cause hardness at the scalp. If the abscess is small, and you have pliers, clip it at its root;
If it so, and place the bous, dont est un tontre le paisse peindre, si onestrelle de isme une.
From large hanging mouths Never does it occur in bellies or elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance like gums, with subtle roots and large branches; and within them are both small and very large.
And I saw a man who had two bellies that looked more like fungus than anything else, with no differences; they were white, had fine roots and were split, and contained moisture within them.
I counted and found in one 18 ounces, and in the other 56, and the operation of the incision is such that you should observe if the patient's skin is moist, and the color of the tissue is pale, moist, and fine-rooted.
If the swelling reaches the stump's width, and they are in your presence, apply fire caustic. For during sawing, there often come great blood loss, and if it does not cease, then promptly use a cautery.
And if you see the patient anxious and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of linen, and bind it as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then the restraint, continuing to strain the thread until it reaches the joint, causing much effort; if the roots are thick, be wary of covering too much for the belly, but cover most well.
then cauterize so it does not return; then treat the wound, and ensure you do not cover the thorn that is of inflamed color, poor feeling, and redness.
For it is an infection from syphilis, and I will come to the treatment of this sore hereafter.
When the mouth is too tight
When the appearance of a swelling comes by wound or puncture to the face and is below the chest in one of its folds, as it happens in other regions, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or inflammation.
and if it is by the puncturing of the face and from the outbreak of pus, then the appearance of the abscess resembles that of the body's color, and it is a mild thing without pain, open on various sides. the c.
If it is due to moisture, it is an easy matter, and once properly pressed with your hand without much force; if due to blood, there are large and hard pus marks, and they are embedded according to a quantity.
And if it is due to inflammation, then it is sensitive upon touching, and the wound heals in a way that you must examine whether its appearance suggests arterial blood, vein blood, or inflammaturity. If it is necessary to let the wound heal on its own. For there is doubt and fear as I have said in my chapter of abscesses, for arterial blood and veinous blood.
And if the appearance is for the intestines or bowels, it must be commanded that you have the patient wash his hands and let them be extended straight, then tie a string around all. Then command him to lie supine between your hands, Then go around the body where you have signed the poultice, Then extend the flap of an abscess above the entire knob.
Then work the flap of an abscess extended over the vein and tie your knot securely, and pull it tight. If you find it caught by the ligament, then dislocate it, and push the intestine into place through the anus.
If you find the hernia, take hold of its root, and remove any excess tissue.
If the artery feels against you or pulsates, and if it swells quickly, then return to your initial work and take two needles, and insert two wires through them, and place the two needles opposite where you have made a cross that indicates the incision.
bygird the t�0 fir s ça : When you come upon a cut that is slick and raw, then treat as necessary, and close the wound as we have said.
When you come upon a cut that is slick and raw, then treat as necessary, and close the wound as we have said. And remove any blood or pus you find, then treat the area as required, and sew it up.
In regards to ulcers.
by this. That the following thesus and cur so far.
And the operations, when in place or can be removed as we have said, are to purge the patient once of black bile; then make a bandage if there is obvious overfilling, then prepare the patient with clean area for the operation; then pour on your herbs or cream, and remove hair from all parts, and any osteophytes from all parts without leaving anything behind; allow blood to flow freely, pressing firmly on the site with hand or an object, and if bleeding occurs in a direction opposite to the incision of artery or vein, cauterize until it stops; then attend to further treatment until healed.
Dropsy (edema) In the division of what we have said about dropsy (edema), and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each kind, and the treatment done by medicines, and that which is treated with iron: it should only be; and one must not touch on iron in these two kinds: that is to say, tympanites and hydropsy, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this kind of dropsy that is called "swelling" by medicines, and the treatment does not help, if patient has weak or he has another disease than dropsamoebbe pas; si l'on peut dire que est ou trop vieil. Lay your hands firmly on the patient's belly, and have the assistant press down at the lowest part of the groin with water, then take a spatula made of bone according to this form: And it should be sharp from two parts. pointed, yet not so piercing that when inserted, it can reach the intestines or cause bleeding.
Then observe if dropsy has invaded the intestines: If necessary, make an incision on top of the groin with three straight cuts. And if dropsy is due to liver disease, make the incisions on the left side of the groin; and if it's from a tumor, do so on the right side, ensuring that the patient lies on the incision site so that excess fluids don't flow into the weakened area.
Then puncture the entire skin with the instrument, and squeeabandages (drainage) from it. And lift your hand to all the spatula between the skin and fascia just as if you were scraping off a quantity of an onion or similar; then pierce the fascia until the spatula reaches the site eight fingers in length, which is where the fluid pocket lies, and drain it. Then cut this instrument according to the following form: It's like a delicate silver sieve, and made of iron wire or light copper, with a part below three small holes; on one side, there are three holes; and on another side, two more; and another has one, just as if you were carving an eagle feather. This is the shape for making incisions where writers cut the feathers:
At the head above is the hemorrhoid, so when there is swelling at the vein, it descends onto the instrument; therefore empty the majority or one-third of it, because if you empty more than necessary in that hour, by chance the patient may die due to resolution of his spirit from the blood loss, where he sweats palms, or nears death.
However, empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the virtues in the patient signify, and his hairs; then guide the instrument and retain the vein, which is now held by the key that pierces the fistula located under the skin, as I have explained, you pierce it this way; then resume the instrument on the following day if you see the patient suffering from this.
Do this for any day, and guard from using the fire too much until it does not remain but just some water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave him with lots of blood, treat the burial or hot sand baths, and by plenty sweating or bathing in the sun, and dye your drink; and treat with dry medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize above the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of blood as I have said before.
Of the blockage of the rod (or penis) Never is a child born who does not have an opening in the penis, or if it is small, or not in its place. If necessary, as soon as possible pierce with a very fine needle according to this method: then put on a very thin clove of garlic, and bind and leave so for three days or four; and when he needs to urinate, untie the closure, allowing him to pass urine, and then reset it; but sometimes it may not work because the passing urine does not close the opening. If the opening is small, then it can be treated with the garlic remedy as we have described, and it will expand. Those who do not have an opening in their place are blocked because no child is born with the opening at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their member; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and this is a bad illness.
And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, with the head of the rod and the cup as straight as a pen's length so that the urine may flow easily, as it should; and guard against blood seepage which often occurs, and if it happens, use the ligature to stop bleeding and treat the wound until healed.
And of pus-filled sores on the rod. Many times these abscesses come in the rod, and have a hideous appearance; there are both malignant and benign ones; it is necessary that you pick them with a very fine needle, bandage and clean thoroughly, then place cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diaphanous balm until healed. If the testicle is ill-looking with pus and inflammation, it must be treated with cautery. Once you have bandaged it, if the testicle is hanging low and partly inside the hair and partly outside, remove the testicle that is entirely internal; once removed, treat the part that was outside. Because when treating both together, they are not fully secured to prevent perforation, darkening and decay occur in the scrotum, leading to pain and potential rupture; therefore, address all blackened and corrupted areas with a poultice made from peel of red apples and rue, then continue treatment until healed.
If blood discharge occurs, apply lunar cautery as follows: The cautery is used in two ways together—to stop the bleeding and to prevent decay. And if the testicle has become corrupted and shrunk, it must be inflated or drawn out with a plank of wood, then urinate on the patient; when the hairs at the top of the scrotum are sparse due to these conditions causing wounds or abscesses in those who have not been circumcised, one must scrape them off using an instrument made of iron until all attachments are removed and the testicle is freed from all sides.
If the wound is se tissun cestrelleit vient lune peir le chiefde la verge si covient est simee qui ille chies desas et de le verge ce. Et que tu leslue d’a lien de verge, eau ile miel; et puis tissié de le pate en cheinque peil, et quant cove lune du la verge ne covient est la bail despeit, si il met iee ce que tuie s.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not a continuous separation like other wounds; however, if we perform this work of our own will and properly for children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the easiest to health.
I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, as they do not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
This is the translation of the text line by line:
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundificación que es dou dal n'est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundificación de l'ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, y corront l'uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu'il n’ont mestier de mundificación y je l’ai veut.
De la mundificación que es feita con fuerzas al todo el lien del fio he trovado la bondad del experimento, porque las fuerzas cortan igualmente arriba y abajo.
When you press your hand, make all parts even in one piece of skin; but the thread should be well taut around the hide; and it must have a shape like the first operation so that if the child hears, they think you are only winding the thread around the rod solely, and then make it expand in every way possible. Then keep the rod straight between your hands without showing any strands to the child, nor any movement; then place your hand on the rod and blow or kindle it until the head of the rod is upright; then cleanse well from the filth that has accumulated there; then tie the end with a double thread; then attach it below some point to another link; and hold as two loops at the pouchet and the indicated handle, making space between the two loops; then lift the flame quickly and turn the head of the rod.
Then keep the rod straight between your hands without showing any strands to the child, nor any movement; then place your hand on the rod and blow or kindle it until the head of the rod is upright; then cleanse well from the filth that has accumulated there; then tie the end with a double thread; then attach it below some point to another link; and hold as two loops at the pouchet and the indicated handle, making space between the two loops; then lift the flame quickly and turn the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow slowly and slowly as it is weakness; and put powder on and over the powder a small drapery glued with half of an egg cooked without salt mixed with rose water, soaked with good fresh oil rosé, and leave until the following day, and cure with another treatment as long as it becomes healthy.
The form of strength for purification is as follows: both heads should be held and sharp, and the head should be as large as the hand equally.
The error in purification occurs when the core within escapes during incision; therefore, it is necessary for you to extend it with your fingernail, similarly causing an abrasion on the skin, and then cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, use pincers, and then cut.
And if they persist for three days, and what is under the rod is swollen, leave it until the abrasion has calmed down, and lightly scrape off; then cut as you can move, but beware of the part of the rod, this will not harm him at all.
Thus treat the sudden wound of powder as we have said about treating powders, and if it is covered over too much, and it goes beyond, then no harm will result; treat accordingly, as we have said, until it is healed.
For the retention of urine
Retention of urine is due to inflammation of stones, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or similar things that we have said in the section.
If the urine is not discharged, and you see that there is retention due to a stone in the bladder neck or urethra, it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; then place their feet on the back and extend their belly from above the back, while restraining the patient as much as possible; and then one must strain the neck of the bladder to expel the stone from above, causing the urine to flow out.
And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with an instrument called "syringe," of which this is the form: it should be made of fine silver wire, like a bird's feather; and its tube should be one palm in length and half, and also slender at the top.
And the method for urine evacuation is that you take a double thread and tie a small piece of wool or cotton at one end, then insert this into the syringe's head. Trim any excess wool and fit it to the top of the syringe; then grease the syringe with oil or butter and almond oil, and have the patient sit on a stool, and moisten their bladder and penis with olive oil and fresh water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, so that it reaches near the root of the penis, then wrap the penis over towards the belly; then inject the syringe up to the bladaturessay venue until the empty thing is reached, and this is not done in accordance with this order because the path through which it goes is twisted; then extend the thread along all the wool gradually, and urine follows the wool, then extract it forcefully, and quickly clear the urine.
Then resume the syringe as long as the bladder is emptied, and align the patient's body.
For diseases of the bladder.
When scalds or blood enters the bladder, where there is an assemblage of pus, and you see it needs to be drained with waters and medicines, do so using all instruments called "clepsydra", which is how it's done.
It is closed, and if it has .iii. openings: two on one side and one on the other as you see; and let the leus be where medicine channels are made so that they well outflow without addition, allowing us to draw moisture and insert when necessary.
And when you see to pour medicines into the bladwart, place the head of the catheter where the moisture is found, and draw with the drain which is therein; if drained by the drain, then reinforce its placement strongly; through it, the moisture will enter now, so that the patient will feel it in their bladder.
et it is the form of the subtle suppository with which we treat the bladder: this one is so.
And it is made of silver or lead, and the head is higher up; and from one side or where the ligaments tear; then take a sheep bladder and put in there the moisture you wish to use for clisterizing the bladardyne (bladder), then tie the bladder between two breasts with a strong double thread, and heat it somewhat on fire; then insert the head of the suppository into the penis, and hold your hand over the bladder until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladardyne.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle in it, then bore roundly through; then thread strong string through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a ball, and put inside what oil, moisture, and water that you wish to use, and tie it up on the instrument; and do so as if you had made with the bladardyne (bladder), press until the moisture reaches the bladardyne.
From the stone
We have explained in the division the methods of stone removal and medicines used for extraction; we have described the difference between stones that are embedded like thorns, all signs indicating a stone, and how to treat certain types of stones; we will also address treatment concerning the bladder and penis.
I say that stones embedded in the bladder occur more often in children, and it is indicative of water from the bladder spilling out like a spring; they have frequent urination, painful erection of their penises, and frequent emission of semen; these symptoms are quite common among them until about 4 years old. It is very severe in elderly men, moderate for those between youth and middle age, and the cure is easier for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, to expel all filth from within the intestines. For at times there may be an obstruction due to stones.
Then take the patient by the hips and stand them upright, tilting until the stone descends to the front of the bladebody. Sometimes it comes out from below; then make him sit between your hands appropriately, with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder slopes downward completely. Then grasp and touch inside gently.
If you feel the stone in that place, hurry to push it out with your fingers. And if it does not come out by touching fully, moisten your left index finger with oil, and put it into the patient's mouth if they are young, or your middle finger if they are fully grown; then insert it deep into their urethra, grasp the stone, and when you feel it at your fingertip, move to the neck of the bladebody; then press with your finger and expel it where you see fit.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder into his hand, and command that he extends with his right hand the joints above, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the joint where the cutting takes place; then he applies the plastering paste, from which it takes its form:
And make between those that are between the joints and the foundation, not into it but to the side of the left leg; and be straight on the stone, and turn your legs in place or towards the foundation, and shape them so wide where necessary for depth, yet narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
And perhaps press the joint that is at or near the foundation, so they do not bend without effort; and know there are parts of the stone where it has angles or edges: if these are hard to remove; and those parts that are smooth like a leaf, round, with an easy way out.
For the shoulder when it has angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not yield, it is proper to widen using tongs similar to a file on the head, in order to stretch the bone so that it does not slip out; or you strike from under the delicate instrument curved at the top; and if you cannot manage thus, enlarge slightly one small hole, and if the skin breaks, strain with vitriol.
And if there are more than one bone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut downwards, then the narrow part, and after that the smaller ones if there are others. And if they are very large, it should be sawn off, making a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: death or urine comes in through where the leak cannot seal; but nevertheless strive for draining or breaking with tongebutto remove first as much of the protruding bone fragments as possible.
And when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and apply it tightly, and place over a cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rose water and cold water to cool down the sore; then bandage the patient on their neck and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
And when you reset it, the joint is raised quite well with oil and water, then treat it with finaliagon ointment and basiliagon ointment until healed.
And if an abscess comes in the wound and pus formation, and blood clotting in the bladder, causing urine retention known to exit partially without a jet: insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, the bladder will be corroded, and protrude.
Then raise the wound with water and salt and oil, and care for it in all ways you know of, until healed; and ensure that on any openings you treat, secure the two thighs together, and apply ointments at the site.
And if the stone is small and located near the groin, inserted deep within, preventing urine flow; treat as I have described beforehand, frequently excusing oneself for relief due to this treatment. I have experienced such cases myself.
Take an iron rod according to this shape and it is with three sharpened ends in one piece of wood:
Then take a wire and wrap it around the groin near the stone, so that it cannot move backward into the bladero then gently insert the rod into the groin until you reach the stone; then turn the rod slightly in your hand at the stone little by little, as long as you can pierce through the other side of the stone; urine will come out shortly, and press down with your hand where something remains lodged inside the groin. It is thus broken into pieces, jumps away with the urine, and the patient is cured.
If you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take a thread under the stone and another on top, then make the rod at the place of the stone between the two threads, then extract the stone forcefully, and loosen the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood present in the wound; and treat it until it is healthy.
From women's stones
There are times when stones occur in women, and if they do so occasionally, the treatment is difficult due to three things: firstly, because perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and secondly, there cannot always be found a woman who knows how to undress before witnesses, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that sometimes one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone from the man, so it must be made deeper, causing great fear.
And if it is necessary to approach this matter, one must find a midwife who knows well and has great experience, and if you cannot find such, then do not seek an obscure sophyster; the present is about a knowledgeable midwife in women's health or a woman skilled in part of the art, and she commands to carry out as instructed for stone extraction.
And you must observe very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she should insert her finger or phallus and search for the stone; if she finds it, she should constrain it from below her finger, and recommend that she inserts her finger or clitoris with the patient's left hand against their bladder firmly.
If it is the upper arm, then gradually move from the top of the armpit down to just below, until it reaches the hip root; then cut near the bone at the thigh's base against the hollow of the elbow where it appears bent, feeling for the bone in that area; and do not move its joint above or below the bone, but secure with a small bandage.
Then push the bone inward into the thigh; if you feel the bone, stop until the bone can protrude fully, and know there are many types of bones: small and large and sharp and blunt, long and round, with veins. Recognize them to understand how they exit.
And if the bone does not break, apply vitriol paste, and let it sit for an hour until it loosens; then return to your work, until the bone is freed, and use the supports I have told you in removing the bones from homes to assist you in your work.
If the blood does not stop, and it is from an artery that has been severed, apply powder to the area and compress with bandages and tourniquets, without attempting again, leave the stone alone unless the patient dies, then treat the wound.
And when the heat of blood is calmed, and the limb stiffens, return to your work until the stone is firmly in place.
Regarding a hernia made of flesh
Applying moisture is nothing but a gathering of mucus or pus, which lies under the edge of the joints, contained in the vein; and it is called "pus," and never properly within the lining of the vein, if one believes it to be another kind of fluid; and this is the leather between the white pus we have mentioned; and such things do not occur often.
And the creation of this dislocation results from weakness at the joints, where that material is spread.
And never does it come from impact on the joints, and this mucus has many colors: or it is a tint leaning towards jaundice, or without redness, or black, or white and watery, and this happens more frequently.
These are the signs of recognizing this assembly: if it is as we have described, then the abscesses are round and long like an egg's shape, and do not open at all because they are entirely moisturized.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are round with a part of the yolk, and because this is thought to be another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the yolk and the whites, then it feels soft; therefore when you see to determine the color of the moisture, feel all around thoroughly, which is why its shape was as before mentioned. According to what follows after the introduction, judge according to what is found within.
According to what follows after the introduction, judge according to what is found within. And when we cure by using a tool, it is necessary for the patient to be as healthy and full of body strength as possible; then they lie on their back with something slightly raised underneath them, and place many layers of cloths.
then they lie on their left side, and command the assistant to sit on their right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the corner of the loins;
the following.
Then pierce the sac clean with water to one large hole, and drain all the fluid, and then apply bandages, and raise the sac upwards; do not touch the core of the joints, but only the sac itself; carefully or piece by piece cleave through the bone of it, ensuring you cut adequately well, otherwise the fluid will return.
and if the joint springs back during your work, when you have completed the task on the sac; then join the two halves of the joint core with stitches, and treat it as other wounds until they are healed.
And if you find the joint corrupted with another disease, it is necessary that you tie off any vessels that are dilated, suspecting blood flow; then cut away the entire pouch, drain it, and treat as we have said before.
And if the fresh vessel is joined in two parts together, recognize that these are two branches; then tie off the other part as you did with the first equally, and drain the blood, then apply a linen soaked in oil to the wound.
and place another bandage soaked in wine and oil on it, and apply to both ends, and put over doubled cloths, and bind securely around all the connection as per this method.
Then take two pieces of cloth and place the shredded cotton wool as per this pattern on them, and stitch together around the gullet of trousers, with one end reaching up to the back, and the other at the thumb side; then both heads are tied under the armpits, and all is tightly bound in a braided belt.
Et never is this branch of the fire cautery in place without using an iron tool for cutting, so take a delicate cauterizing blade and prepare the leather straps, and heat it as we have said, ensuring that the white substance within the liquid is covered.
If you take the cauterizing tool according to this method and pierce the white substance at its nodes, then scrape with this delicate hot cautery.
And the scraping should be done in all ways that you can, until everything is removed; and ensure that the flame does not touch the flesh; and know that this work is more healing; and followers of proper blood flow, and avoid disturbances from cutting.
If anything contrary occurs, such as an abscess or bleeding or other issues, treat what causes the issue according to what has been previously stated.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this treatment due to its severity, prepare a perforation as I have instructed you; only do so when you are certain based on the meanings we have discussed that cleansing with water is necessary.
If the patient lies on his raised seat; then make the incision below to the entire swelling area wide apart, and place the perforation with its length along the body's width; and let the channels be wide enough that all water flows freely.
Then place cotton at the level, secure it, and allow time for the remaining moisture to dry out, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the white cloth does not allow moisture to escape from the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you insert a pen or instrument as used for treating fluid discharge; thus, make an incision in one place and ensure that the moisture can return, usually within 4-6 months. And when reassembled as before, the patient will gradually recover their health.
For abscesses caused by boils
In this part of the treatise on this subject are fearful conditions due to various arrangements, which seem to me that they must be left untouched.
and I will tell you about the work and appearances of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the joints; and this happens very often.
c. If you do:fla are notec. Doctors.
The color of an abscess follows the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess.
And sometimes it may be a frightening and dangerous abscess, with fiery red color, never coming from our arteries or vein swelling.
When it is by our arteries, it can be recognized by the warmth of the abscess when you press with your fingers. The same: 2, sofat and they c: Hows.
He who is affected by vein swelling is known by his tendency to express pain upon touching the joints.
and may well feel relief from this affliction, and other discomforts as well. and instruct you to examine the joints; then elevate the limb, and treat the white sack (synovial membrane), and release any swollen parts of the joint.
If the leg is already supported with these supports, then it is necessary to adjust the leg and bandage.
And if it is hollow in the thigh or within the vessels, then you must remove all of that held together, and wrap evenly around.
And if the birthmark is located behind it, then you must wrap all of that and extract the leg as we have said.
te* 380;
Of abscesses of the veins
This is an abscess surrounded by wrapping like a swelling, with softening of the veins. and it causes severe pain for patients when they move;
the first; on:
Et anyway we shall tell you the treatment for it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then place the suspensory under their knees for support. by:t isle andre, so that they:
Then apply a sharp scalpel at a wide spot where the veins are, until they are exposed.
and then cut from each side, as we have said in extracting arteries that are within temples;
then insert a needle with a double thread, and tie it at the first spot where blood is seen, and securely to the other end; .
Then treat the wound as you would with other burns, ensuring none of the vessels are severed so that either remains.
For by this there is no harm, and if all the vessels come into view, then it is necessary to tie off both limbs at each vessel. If so that the ear loses its hearing due to the vessels being cut and dried, which cannot be helped.
with m: n'set20 you cite: The effects of this treatment come from the incision which occurs in the scrotum or the extension above the belly near the arms, causing the intestines to be displaced towards one of the legs.
And this displacement can occur from the scrotum or its extension, and come about in these two ways for various reasons: by blows, jumps, shouts, severe pain, and similar things.
And the signs when it is from the extension of the scrotum occur gradually over long periods and do not happen suddenly. And it is like abscesses extending up to the navel, for the spleen hastens the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the sack, which brings sudden pain at the beginning and diverse abscesses appearing from beneath the skin, for the issue of the intestines and the body due to a perforated sack.
And at no time do the winds with the intestines, and are retained therein, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these treatments of iron out of fear, so it must be avoided.
And the method of treatment is that you command the patient to reset the intestines into his hand within the wound if it can be reinserted. Then gently push on its neck between your hands and lift the hindquarters.
Then extend the head upwards, and scrape off all the skin from the thighs long. Then insert into the ribs of the waist hooked ones as needed to open the wound, and they are such that one can come out.
Then scrape off the fat layer underneath the skin of the shank until all white fat is removed from all sides.
Then insert your finger into the space where the shank is between the white fat that is underneath the skin of the elbow, and between the second fat layer.
. And command the attendant to extend the mouth upward, and pull out that which is behind the joint.
And if there is intestines wrapped around or white faeculent mass hardened, and if you find anything such, insert it back into the abdomen from below.
Then take a needle or a thread made of eight strands, and insert it into the rear part hardened with faeculence, which is after the sheep's bladder leather; behind the belly button, then cut the sinews that appear from the threads until you have four strands. Then join them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross and bind the hardened faeculence, which we have said is after the sheep's bladader leather, with a strong ligature made from two parts. Then wrap the heads of the children and form two parts from them so that no worm may enter their mouths, ensuring that an abscess does not occur. And then place the ligatures according to the first one, and after these two ligatures leave the sphincter which is below the corner of the colons as large as a finger.
And then the other according to the roundness that the sphincter carries; and cut into the part which is below the skin of the colons so that it may be smooth, and curved as we have said before.
Then treat with fine linen soaked in oil, and apply to wounds, and then bind as we have said. And never is the fistula sealed by fire after incision if there is concern about blood flow.
For this often happens and leaves the binding as long as it bleeds from itself; and if it delays in healing, then apply warm water and do what we have said until it stops bleeding.
their:
Of hernia causing flesh protrusions
In this remedy, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said it is made just as the ratchet which is assembled with bolts, so that you join the parts after the cut above lightly at the bottom.
and that they are not a:
Never occurs protrusion of the kidneys, as we have said, and they open up; and no part of the intestines exits through the joints, and if there is an exit, it's slight, and heals all hours.
And generally, if it remains too long in this regard, the wound forms or hernia occurs as long as the intestines exit.
And this occurs due to the extension of the hernia which is in the groin, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflated are the eyes and opened.
And the treatment is by cautery as we have previously stated; and it has never been treated with iron in this manner:
And it is that the ill person lies on their back between your hands, then cut off the inflated edge of a loin cloth according to the quantity of three handbreadths;
And then extract the sinew that is under the skin which it follows, and take hold of its root and place it over the visible part of the sinew.
And press at its front towards the belly, then cut the two ends of the sinew near to the head of the tendon and tie both.
then extract the head of the tendon, and do not cover the sinew or extend any other part as I have shown you in the treatment of the wound of the intestines.
bytudres. ça (and: bon t; the.
The face is distorted, and has no appearance in the region, and the fire cautery is moved too much at this place, closer to healing.
Of softening due to dampness of the leather thongs.
Many times the leather of thongs becomes soft in some homes because the wheels inside are made malleable and it is seen; and when one wants to cure them, they make the patient lie on their back with the breechcloth placed over the natural skin; then join the two edges with a single seam, and if you look at it, first remove the excess soft leather by three or four firm stitches; then stitch between the stitches as other wounds until they are healed completely, and lick the thread.
By gentle handling
The method of bleeding is deemed unworthy in our law, and I would not speak of it herein this book; however, it is necessary for two purposes: one, so that physicians can respond with the treatment when asked, and another because we often need bleeding of various animals to aid us, such as goats, sheep, and others. Therefore, I say that bleeding is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. In the method where we perform bleeding through attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until its joints are softened and heated; then press with your hand until they are restored and you no longer feel them. Regarding bleeding by cutting: ensure you hold the animal, and grip the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie up the tendon, and make incisions on each foot after thoroughly scalding them; and leave none of the delicate or subtle fat underneath the flesh. This method of bleeding is similar to that done by attraction because sometimes nothing remains from the joints during attraction, which causes the animal to desire mating; then treat the wound until it heals.
On hermaphrodites: they are beings with both male and female sexual characteristics or reproductive organs. Their nature is a subject of great curiosity and concern in medical texts, often attributed to various causes ranging from divine intervention to environmental factors. In medieval medicine, understanding and treating such conditions required careful observation and knowledge of the humoral balance within the individual's body. Treatment approaches could include dietary adjustments, herbal remedebies, or other interventions aimed at restoring bodily harmony.
There are two ways as in men: one is that between the two testicles it appears just like the nature of a woman's body, where there may be hair, and sometimes even during urination. The other way is as in women, with a clitoris along with two nipples. The treatment for man and woman is that you cut off all attached glands, and treat them as you would any other wounds; in the second manner, men whose urine flows through the skin of their testicles do not have a cure.
Removal of tainted or malign influences (i.e., surgical intervention to remove cancerous growths) is necessary for healing.
Tumor is a growth attached to the natural part, so much that it is too unsightly to look at; and some women have as big of one as a hand, and this is its cure. It must be done to remove excess tumor from your hands or joints gently, and do not cut too deeply, lest bleeding occurs, then treat with another remedy until it heals; and for another growth that exists at the mouth of the jawbone, and into the muscle, and sometimes bursting forth, which resembles a hernia, and is hence called "kowe disease" by our predecessors. If you must remove it as we have described tumor removal, and treat until it heals.
Of querns
: Et le ome; et anne cones de lue si ist : les meilies dude; puis les dure, tendre:nts, il mene cominis que semblent a la ou ils est par ce est coumple deme laste leu.
Of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are outward expressions of veins which without customary frequency, and when hemorrhoids become hardened; and we have said in their division the similarities of those, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive cure. I say that hemorrhoids and lumps, when they are fully formed within the marrow, and do not appear upon touching, but only through a knife's cut. Those which can be felt at the mouth of the marrow, one can treat them. Therefore it is necessary to place the woman in a cold house, then stretch out the lumps with pincers, and the root by its roots; then powder with medicines restraining blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, among other things; then pour its juices onto a piece of cloth for an hour, then place in very cold water. And if there is bleeding, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and apple tree bark and hawthorn and such things; then take wheat flour, confit with honey and egg yolk, and apply it as a poultice to her back. And if that works, it's good. If not, use blisters on the back and near the breasts without iron; then take linen, and milk in plantain or hawthorn juice with old wine, and treat as before. And when the lump is healed, apply ointment until healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and feels rough like a head, so cover it as I have described the lumps; then cure until healthy.
Abscesses of the marrow
Many ways of abscesses come in the thighs, such as chancre and pierous abscesses, herpes, itching disecuasions, fistules, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and other maladies that I have mentioned in the division. Thus, one must say about this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the thighs, which is not like those that bud; and when you see its onset, watch if it is warm and feverish at first, and turns red if you can see it. Then do not hasten to puncture, but let the pain be alleviated first; then have the patient sit on a stool, with two small stools where he leans, and rests his back while assembling his legs apart from each other; spread his thighs wide, place his arms below his hips, and bind them well with good linen; then offer him water to drink towards his right side, and arrange the instrument used in working inside the mouth of the thigh, by which later comes the form; it is necessary that when you see arranging this instrument, insert its rod first to know the depth of the thigh, so that what enters from the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not hurt the patient. And if there are large swellings, then cover the depth of the thigh with a cloth, so that the swellings do not harm; and place the horn of the instrument above, and dye the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and you touch it gently with your hand, then cover its head with sponge linen; and if the cavity is emptied, then put in gauze soaked in oil rosins or dry greenish olive oil into the wound; place the pad firmly on the front of the thigh and towards its depth. And when you have cured it for two days with appropriate dressings, raise the thighs and wound using an enema of water and honey mixed with cooked quails or malva leaves; then return to the ointment as we mentioned earlier in that division. And if the wound is reopened on the thigh, be cautious not to use iron but treat it as we have said in that division.
Childbirth refers to the process of delivering a baby from the mother's uterus into the world outside. It involves labor and delivery stages, which can vary greatly among individuals. Pain management, monitoring for complications, providing support during contractions, and ensnaring the newborn safely are all critical aspects of managing childbirth effectively in a medical setting.
First it is necessary to know the natural shape of childbirth and its signs when you see a woman hasten to expel and desire to smell urine; then quickly understand that such childbirths follow the natural figure, with issues from under the head, accompanied by second twins; and when you see these signs, it is necessary gently press her belly so the child comes out soon; for as they come down on their head, the second twins are also born, and the mares of surplus milk are well emptied through good milk removal; and those that arrive otherwise do not come naturally. For sometimes they come on their feet, or to the body or hands, coming forthly, or turning by chance over her neck, in other malicious figures; it is necessary at birth to be wise and subtle in these matters, and avoid mistakes and deceptions, and I will show you all childbirth figures as one should assist.
If the child comes down naturally from under his head and the woman labors heavily, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a stool or be held by women; and apply to her nature oils like fenugreek cooked, and then give the midwife between her thighs the small spatulous tool of this form: de la femme. And the oile.
From the dislocation of a child on its feet When a child comes to be on their feet, you must set it upright. and then gently turn them slightly until they are levelled.
the text ou:
If it falls down to the thighs, as you command, let them sneeze from this condition. If it falls again, if God wills so.
And if it cannot be turned as we have said, turn it slightly until it is in its natural position. For then it should be lightly.
And if it does not come as we have said, take musk of almonds, and oil for massaging, and melted wax, and all in a single pestle. ; Then let him sit upright on water until below the ribs.
And when it is softened underneath, you give it a barley gruel, and place it beneath, and leave it for an hour. iste de l’vient, and les quittere tire ondust en s From the dislocation of a child on its knees When the child comes in this form, place your hands gently and gradually.
From the issue of a child, during which they urinate with one hand raised. ; that he may not ce pirt songe; they dontt le chest ; If it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go.
If she cannot walk, lay her on a bed with legs bent.
Then apply the remedy I have described;
 And place the child according to natural form, and it may gag, and command that he swallows until the infant has suckled fully.
Of dislocation of the child at its neck, and extend its hands, with its face turned toward its mother's back. I command that you wash your hand, then slightly turn it little by little, and do so gently.
; The s that (they c, then the ould by and #. I's. Andare Tad; they trecor: man but he. Do it is telle d a C^t; c
And when you have accomplished this, let her sit on a chair, and command that she coughs; and make her sneeze. In the same manner, for all secondary procedures
In the same manner, for all secondary procedures When it comes in this way to all secondary processes, you may cut the flap with your knife, as long as the moisture is drained.
his, and ementt s that lesse they de a t or the time que by.
Then insert the child inside as you have properly placed it, and instruct the woman not to move at all.
From the origin of gangrenes ; There are two things that arise, which do not live except a little while.
I know this well, that they may multiply and are destroyed by the worm which drives them out, which is tied to bile.
And at no time do they come forth naturally like a louse's egg, as we have said.
they the p (don't be it: And make it as when it is moved to health. Of many children.
Of many children. the
It is necessary for the bailiff to know all this, as sometimes similar things happen. coblish and m:
of a child who has died
When treating a woman who has given birth to a dead child or an unborn fetus as I have described in the section, and if there is no discharge, and you must perform surgery with your hands... if you must determine whether the woman is in good health and has not had any accidents or fears of death...
If it is necessary that the woman lie supine on her back, with her head turned downward, and legs raised.
And the minister shaves three parts of it, so that it is tied up on the bed in such a way that it cannot be treated during childbirth.
Then rub the mouth of the womb with oil from fresh almonds and fennel seeds and flaxseed, then anoint the woman's hands with these oils and extracts. the scso sccorte ne con ia (et that ntre chestaind. If:
And take care if a child is appearing as withdrawn, descending above its head; How the mouth or in one of its chin or lips or gueules.
And if there is a swelling on the feet, if it splits or pierces through to the middle ribs.
And it is fitting that you wash the string on his right hand, and place the pillow between your two fingers of the left hand, and press firmly with all your might, inserting the string in none of these ways as we have said, until it comes to an empty space.
Then make a cut towards another vein or where you need it, so that the extractions are evenly done.
And then extend it equally by moving from one side to the other, so that they can move out and in; keep the veins open as needed, according to its shape.
And if any part remains, apply some oil with a cloth on his wound, and pour it into that part, then treat the other part.
man; you try if two  -
And if one hand comes before the other, it cannot be brought back due to the tightness. If it is necessary that you wrap around a bandage, so that it extends completely;
Then treat at the joint of the sole or heel, and so it is necessary that you do in the other hand with both feet.
When the child's head is large and awkward at birth, or if it has a sharp or pointed forehead. If it is necessary to push the fontanel (soft spot on the head) between your two fingers, and gently press the forehead and extract fluid. or you use the instrument called "almidach," from which comes with emissive treatments or subsequent procedures like this.
s, so: curtre lais not; izzy and c; Et then draw out the bones with pincers,
And if the head has fallen out and is held by straps, be split until the moisters that have issued are cut.
And if they cannot come out, cut them into pieces as you can move them.
If it is swoln on the belly or below the ribs, it must be pierced until the moisture dries up.
the
If it is strained in the belly or udder, one must unwind it with a cloth wrapped around and held by hand. If there is swelling in the belly or udder, until the moisture present is completely gone.
col de a c force too much leu put as pas mesprun: oun te lay too; If one strikes his hand on the edge of a pestle, and drags it up to the mouth of the pestle. Then he places one or two spatulas, and rubs it firmly.
and if the mouth of the pestle is swoln with heat from an abscess that has arisen therein, then it should not be worked on. Soft they:l’t :m's; Fodgi que la pe’rement the deme et as well. 1. If n’ssed that le t. Et, and are theta. Tard; Seus; And he makes them swellish and softens with moisture, and renders supple.
. Tue la, et m ct and so e ke tul, at; the ou ne:
And if it cannot be moved at all, then tear apart by pieces, leaving nothing of the secondary tissue.
And when you have done this, if there are abscesses as we have said come in the muscles, then cleanse them.
and if bleeding occurs, put it into a tight bandage, and treat other wounds accordingly.
s; the t or le: After long time came an abscess on his elbow, which swelled so much it covered the area, and began causing great suffering.
I went to seek treatment, but thought long and hard, and could not heal the wound.
I placed under a strong attractive force, and out came an os (bone), and after some days others too. l's, et les t, and y; prist; ous est la ou.
If I thought they were bones of a dead child.
I cleaned the wound and treated its edges until the woman's condition improved. And thus the woman remained in this state for a long time, and it was now somewhat better from there.
the:
To reset the head of the thigh to its place
Here comes the form of pressure, where there are two books; and at two corners, there are two heads of two ligaments. Nevertheless, let the horn be more subtle for restriction, and made of board or boxwood;
 And among the two limbs are dislocations of this same kind, firmly situated in each one and the other, half a palm long or slightly more.
And these two dislocations are bound in the mouth of a gourd to open when turning its two horns.
les; the l's ct: And it has two heads, two dislocations, as you see, one inch long and two inches wide;
and when you see opening of the sores on all instruments, have the woman sit on one bed with her feet spread out and legs exposed; then tie both dislocations together in the sores, and take hold of its end part; Then work your hand with all the instruments, just as you did with pincers evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the barley, until the patient achieves what they want.
These instruments are all made of horn, and there are various kinds resembling them; and when the master has prepared them, the work is quicker, and higher at home for their quantity.
Do not discard the instrument before it has been properly prepared, because its needs are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to grip her ankle and then apply pressure on the condition, and restrain her hands at the mouth and neck. And if she jumps from this, that is well done.
If not, take a pot and make a lid or cover, and place herbs that could open the mouth of the mare (patient), such as chamomile, rue, anise, lavender, chrysanthemum, and centaury.
All these herbs, whether some or all of them, be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put an onion or garlic in one pot and the other head in the mouth of the cauldron.
and let it stew until the steam comes out of the cauldron; then have them sneeze, as we have said. If the smallpox is severe. If it remains after this treatment and is not healed, the nurse must instruct them to moisten their left hand with oil of essence or musk extract, and then apply it to the wound.
And if they want the splint; and when they have found it, gently pull and extend it slightly straight, so that the bone does not protrude during removal. But it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then shaken; it will come out and relax.
And if the mouth of the maris is extended too much, we have said the remedy to induce sneezing and fumigation with herbs.
And if it is not as per all that we have said, make sure you do not follow the erroneous advice;
But it is necessary to tie the object at the mouth of the maris to the woman's thigh, and then enema her with medicated ointment using the quartafarmacists method. (Note: The term "quartafarmacist" does not appear in any known medical or historical texts from that era; it seems to be a typographical error for the "tetrafarmacist" technique, an ancient method of preparing and applying medicinal concoctions.)
t; or not the
Then it is necessary to perform fumigations with incense at this place: none of the ancient ones have tried the fumigation of dried parsley and figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and secondary sex organs is thus:
And it appears as if made of horn, with a subtle head in its structure, and wide cheeks above the fire.
by;
Of cutting below the foundation
The child is born without being pierced at the base, but rather the root has been delicately severed. Therefore it must be that the midwife pierces the delicate root at its due time and does not puncture with the cauterizing iron, and she should carefully avoid touching the suture.
noce can be they aret:
And if you suspect that it may pop out again, then place or a thonged leather strip and let it rest for some days, and be operated on when the child wishes to go about in rooms.
And this type of healing of a wound or abscess does not occur often; if such treatment is needed: apply the leather strip as we have mentioned before.
Of the anal fistula at its base Fistulas that come from below the base are inflammations, and those that grow beneath the foundation, or in the space between the two parts,
If there is one fistula or several; and if that inflammation is longstanding, work on it, and apply either a thick or subtle paste of moisturizing herbs.
and they are persistent fistulas; and recognized by what is seen from their discharge or wind-like symptoms when the patient passes gas, and occasionally in his urine.
s t this.  M. oucquest. Ittutor the c's their.
And thus one finds a persistent fistula at the base, not healing. And you should place your index finger or base of the thumb on it and insert a fine needle made of silver or iron into the fistula, as long as there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, you should insert a thin needle or horse hair, as long as you feel the tent or pull on your end:
And if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or odor or fever as we have said: And say that it does not pierce them; if you are quick in dressing the wound.
dislocaté sont bon. Neris; puis que tu esque poilz est se and is rude les tient maistandiés designe. 340; Thene chirote de qu'est not the liet: d’in, then anfraid tots and bones of dises lont et they aret la gist:
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tendon comes near to its place. If there is no twisting and the pain persists, it must be that it returns again, and no medicines or salves by ointment help.
And in these persistent fistulas there is no certain remedy but hard work, and the foolishness of simpletons who meddle with them.

The patient lies with their back in your hands; and you lift their legs up to their thighs, and keep their thighs angled towards their stomach. Then you make an air or water pillow if there is any twist; as long as you know where the pillow lies.
If the patient feels pain around the pelvis, it is proper to place your index finger there,
When it feels as if something has been pierced; and when you discover or feel a swelling in the place where it should be, then know that it is serious. If one does not attempt to treat it because it cannot be healed.
One can say that many things can be well treated, but this happens rarely.
by the original; they:  the same as it'is on their. Also to speakd; and mort in a colt. and the bottle becomes very hot in the abscess, until it approaches the base; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that the extruded shards are expelled, which resemble an eagle's quill.
and then the treatment of scabbed wounds with grease, as long as those shards are removed; then the dressing application soothing with ointment.
If it is thus safe, that's good. It cannot be otherwise healed;
If it is attempted between them and does not penetrate to the depth that lies at their foundation, and between your two fingers and the tent a thick covering of pitch or tar, then look for the fistula beneath where you hold the covering. If it is at the beginning of the fistula and held up to the tent, apply heat before the tent, and then cauterize afterward until it reaches the tip of the tent.
And will be released from the tent and healed; then remove those misshapen protrusions that resemble a bird's quill, leaving nothing behind.
And if blood is drawn out, and cut between your hand and the wound, so heat it with fire or medicinal pitch.
For the fire cautery gathers two things: that is to say, the drying of sticky wounds and the stopping of blood and removal of moisture.
then the healing of soiled bandages with butter or ground charcoal until it becomes wet, and let the wounds be dried in the poultice.
est. Andaret; they can:
When it is restored, then it is healthy and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way to the base of the foundation, and is pushed away from the body, then you may touch his toe or foot, and examine it.
If you feel the tendon and between two it is either the sack or flesh or cartilage, near to be pierced, only have faith and hope by the administration of one of the three methods:
Or you cauterize as we have said, or cut until the root, or if you can see it has tendons and treat accordingly;
And do not go too deep that you don't cut the element holding the foundation, and let evacuations occur as they will by nature. Then treat as we have said;
Then treat as we have said; In case it becomes clean or you remove the covering and wash it before it is cleansed near the foundation, or by tent or with another instrument sharpened. Then fashion that wrongly placed skin in the wound as you can.
Then study to restore the wound, and maintain the fistula in the part behind the foundation; it would be an easier matter for the patient.
And fistulas are never as follows in this manner: when you insert a tent into the fistula, and it is near the foundation just above the skin. if you take a pierced tent according to this form: the gma; they c
If it is torn near the edge of its foundation within, then extract the thread from that puncture and insert your finger or foundation.
And treat the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, and hold them tightly, and leave for one or two days.
And do not loosen until the stitches have healed completely, when they no longer stick out between the wounds, and bleed.
le t. ue.
If the abscess does not burst, make it punctured in every way that you can, if it is not too deep.
For it does not require the use of a probe for such deeply seated ones, and then treat it, as we have said, until they are healed.
The form of the pointed tool used for creating an abscess is very sharp and one-sided, piercing; by;t ou ne a peus n'est gis not r; the que il bon la grande.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: when they are within the foundation like resin grains, both small and large, with blood in their core. And if there are one or more, affecting the base and its head; but those that are displaced have little moisture,
And again or some yellowish water or a bit of blood, giving the body its color;
And instruct them to heal the wounds so that you may be bound as soon as it's covered and bandages. If you are quick, and with pliers hold it at your nail, then cut close to its roots.
and if the nails cannot be held due to moisture, grasp them with a small rag or thread, or a scrap of camlet fabric. and remove your thumbs, then cut them off, and dust with hot powders that are in place of the cautery. Jorso far them:
If the foundation cannot emerge, then enemas the patient with an irritating and bitter cleansing to wash out what is at the base, so it may come out openly;
If a fistula forms in the patient, and if there are many threads to the foundation, then it is an easy cure; And that you pluck them with your nail or pliers, and cut the roots, then heal as we have said, until it is clean, and so that they fear the incision by iron.
If it is necessary to treat the wound as follows: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn both ends of the two strands away from the needle. and make it as thick as desired; then tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the neednail, and do so with all others, leaving one for excess blood to escape from.
then place a foundation cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the base, and lay it over the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest there.
And then let it heal as much as possible, and when they are set right, treat with ointment and other remedies until healthy.
Through the proper technique or foundational principles Many times, constipation occurs in the intestines due to natural contraction and when illness is old and medicines do not help.
ils est. So the they are all thera ; Then treat until it is suitable as it should be.
And if it cannot be put right, begin the scraping again more strongly than before until it heals completely, and then have them cauterized. Then treat until they are made healthy.
Of great trembling A mouse is a small creature found near the body, often seen frequently.
and at no time does it bring coldness, but rather feels like intense trembling that spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than other parts.
and in the remed: ould heal; Then turn your hand around to grasp the entire shaft as you wrap it completely, and insert firmly at the base, and secure the swelling from its roots.
And if you see it, make a band of lin or iron according to this form, and be subtle below and traverse above.
Do not perceive it for holding with two hands and pressing together, and if you see it, cauterize the swelling as in front or by means of fire cautery.
s; If: At no time is an enema made of silver or brass, or melted lead or metal; and at no time are any of these small and large suppositories prepared according to the method in which they are mixed.
Therefore, those that are treated in children's care and who are weak and painful, are small [suppositories].
The form of the small and large enema is made on a wide area or the belly is tied according to this manner: [Here should follow instructions for tying/preparing the patient for an enema].
And it has a severe protrusion or the belly is twisted, as you see, and the shoulder pierced through; and on one side, two openings, and on the other, one.
And either for a bloated belly or use remedies from an animal bladder or parchment and pierce entirely through the small openings.
And between each opening should be a space of the needle threaded with strong twisted thread and inserted through the small openings several times, then sew up the belly as it was before. When the medication is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then enema; and this is the form of the circle.
And let the medication be neither too hot nor too cold, and rub the head of the enema with oil or butter from a goat's udder, or similar substance, then apply it lightly.
then the minister takes hold of it with both hands together until all hair is removed, and extracts the enema, lifting the patient'n's legs off the table.
with t ma
If you administer an enema due to intestinal disorder, and the patient's condition improves quickly, then it may recur until they are healthy again.
And if the hemorrhoids are swolamoins or abscesses, they should be administered an enema just as for a child's urine.
This is the form of the subtle suppository through which one must keep urine:
Of wounds
We have said in wound treatment; now we will speak of treatments for hands and general medicine, according to the method's completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and by what means or locations the cuts are made, and why they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are due to stones (or bones), and cutting with a sword or knife, or of spear or staff or arrow, or similar things.
:
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head injuries, for recollection shall come in their chapter.
I say that when a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, if you take care if it's from piercing of stones or similar things, and the skin is wholly torn and the wound large. And you gently suspect an abscess: if it is quickly bandaged on the head primarily when there comes blood from the wound, and be made to rest opposite the affected part.
And for the patient's relief, provide a replenishment of wine and fatty meats.
And if he refuses to be bandaged, then reduce his meat consumption, and drink no wine or eat no flesh.
by bon les sji est lela cc
And if there is no abscess, place it on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and not moved by air or powder, which I will say in part later.
And if the arrow has been moved, apply some unguents until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword's handle and of similar things, and the lips cannot join by themselves, then join them by suturing, as I will say for abdominal wounds, in stitching.
If the wound is exposed to bone and flat, and holds only slightly, then patch it up; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard tissue in place of skin. And instruct the patient to eat large meats as tested with cooked wheat and eggs, along with similar things.
And if you find or see rotting flesh, and it does not adhere to the bone, patch all of it up, then pour on a mixture, and treat.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein without a bandage, which it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you must find the artery and if you discover dislocation, tie with a thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: it involves applying this powder that softens as much as the salt has done.
; with ane bon not the tegne they don't; And treat the wound, and firmly hold it, until it heals well and rejoins with all its blood.
And then bind well, and let it heal freely, if there is no swelling; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed completely.
And never do this with hot char only when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but the art has already healed the wound.
If the wound has moved an arrow, especially embedded therein, do not put any of this powder.
but apply with some digested ointments or crushed wheat flour mixed with water and honey, until it heals. then continue treating other ailments until they are healthy again.
que prufd s'e c. And that don’s (and there he said...
And I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
Of the wound of the neck
If a wound occurs at or near the neck and it is simple, there may be no difference between it and that of the head, but if the vein or artery of the neck has been cut.
If it is the vein, there is no other remedy but to allow the bleeding and not put anything that constricts, for it harms the veins and makes them recede. and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the tissue of the veins is cold, and its extensions are with the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
However, let the medicinal substance be like water that has been strained in clear liquid, and mixed with rose oil, and boiled in such clear liquid. and other remedies of minerals according to this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, then dress it with bandages and salve until healed.
t. If the line by ce; they can ze CZr Ast Po: M've te ils not are
If an arrow is embedded, and blood flow occurs, then expose it, extract it, and if necessary, perform cauterization.
If a throat spine or the Adam's apple is embedded, and breathing passages are obstructed, causing tissue damage, then ... If a foreign object lodges in the throat's hollow, do not touch the throat itself but reset it according to its natural contour; ... by. S's:
And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, so you must. If there are bone fragments, if you can pull the threads completely out, and those that you cannot extract, let the wound fester until it heals. And remove any foreign matter and straighten the dislocation.
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder as I have mentioned. ; that t quis not m they n's lesse:; (et so far Clavud se cropleus the time is to, and so if you le s un modern with tha; If you haved. The original: Jum: are prickt-do not so ee, butnere.
Of the wound caused by a lance or knife
If it is a deep wound from a lance or knife, and the patient shows signs of venous insufficiency, then if the wound appears fatal, observe whether there are indications that the wound is lethal. Then ensure that the wound is indeed serious.
And if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder or bind it at first to prevent the flow of any remaining blood. s; that vunt ce f g ski? la;t de la se mar:* But apply an attractive ointment, and let it rest for two days.
And if you have no ointment, place a piece of old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
And make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more as needed. they doe be able to themet the s that is no le m, and: ougt if you not it f (it la. When you see the right conditions of the bones, know that the wound is healed. Treat with bandages and other remedies until it is healthy again;
And if it cannot heal or work as expected, then know there is an abscess; treat accordingly as one should.
that they both line the to be, and it is a s inus:
If it is large, by stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and has jagged edges, then clean the wound, and extract the fragments if needed. And if they are not needed, let the wound heal naturally, making any necessary incisions lighter.
and make judgments for other wounds on other limbs as we have said.
The rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are large, medium, and small.
from a great wound there is no spillage at any time of the intestines or their veins, which causes the infection to enter.
text;
This is how one resets it more often by pushing on the intestines with it, if they are not reset hot and cold. For this reason, the intestines swell quickly when they feel the chill, hence more frequent pushing is required.
And therefore the wound of flesh moves, for this reason one must push back the intestines to their proper place unlike the others.
c de ce e la; that don’sis son lesse is not n, and sof ;
The two common ligaments occur in the abdominal incision,
and the incision of other bodily wounds and two additional specific ligaments are common to other injuries;
and yet they are more particular with the abdominal incision, and I will say each one and declare.
text: And various methods exist to reset it: Due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said. Because the intestines are swoleby due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in a particular manner: wet an sponge or a piece of soft cloth with only cool water slightly. or boil it in lye and salt and pepper, they dose: The text: the gue with de la scath, andz, you must be m cite:
And at no time is it able to stay as such, and it must be moved so that it can swell outwards.
And when you see the inflammation beginning to separate, if the intestines are cooked with soft or hard water and are not well done. because thus is constricted the entry to little by little;
the t: the cell that.
And the first treatment is to move the patient. that we should not cut without great necessity or need.
This is the prognosis to separate them:
If one cuts inside the skull without cause, and fails to heal properly, then observe this form.
And when the wound is swollen, and the bowels have loosened. if it is returned to its natural place in its proper position, the c. Ctre et ils r.
When the wound is wide, and it is located on the part below the belly, If it is necessary that you lay the patient down on their back, and elevate his legs higher than his head; And if it is on the part below the belly,
And as the wind-blown parts are in one of the two, c and the presently.
And thus you must treat as I describe for large wounds and medium ones.
For small wounds use what has been prepared.
and thus you should have at hand a faithful minister who will cleanse the entire affected area with his hands. And bring together the lips; And this is the common way of stitching:
And this is the common way of stitching: le lesm, and to mor: Then leave two spaces at the top of the wound, and then insert a needle with a thick strong thread. And pierce through both corners with the sharp edge of the knife on either side.
Then strain a double thread around the arrowhead of two parts, Then promptly join together the two heads of the wound.
And then leave a space for .i. two arrows, and insert another arrowhead. Then wrap the bandage tightly like you did with the first needle. and continue doing so according to your needs for more needles. as long as all the wound is immobilized;
And are needles of medium thickness, between fine and coarse. Because fine needles cover all of the flesh, and those that are too thick may not enter well. Therefore, they must be medium-sized.
And it is not proper to insert the needles too far from the joint and deep into the skin.
for they should not cover and interfere with the wound near the suture;
then wrap the heads of the needles so that they do not pinch the patient while sleeping. by le que tollos: And let it heal until the wound is well united;
And this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, For it requires one or two needles therein.
et toun gile. And it is that you bind together the two heads of bone with the two ends of sinew, joined by one needle or strong thread. and when you have cut through all four joints assembled,
and when you have cut through all four joints assembled, then guide the needle to the part where you began, in the manner of turning clothes.
Et place between each stitch, the size of a small finger.
These stitches hold the flesh together.
and I stitched a wound of a man who had one belly.
the unt: And the wound was more than one palm wide, great. And it contained two belly-fulls of large intestines.
And the wound was amidst the stomach. est la; and thatmgain:
And it was a wound sewn up until 15 days, and treated by him, and became healthy.
And they thought the monk would die, but it was a miracle.
and did not treat it with ointment, as I was in a place where there was none found, nor any medicine. And put a cloth of two layers on the wound twice daily, and wash it with honey water until healed.
Here are the two proper ways to stitch:
Take the needle and thread through the part forward up to its depth;
by far ne c: s; est m, it that the:
And make a side incision from the inner part up to where it is needed.
and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as a tailor does with hairs, so leave one thread from one end and the other on the opposite side until the suture is completely finished.
t; 1 the short as it uter le Chauze they gobserve:" (d
If it is as with any other fountain, which joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one head of the sack to the other head in such a way:
then insert a needle or close-by hair follicle, and make an incision there only. as it so that li: Then turn the needle, and make it pierce through to the part behind until it reaches inside. if both shoulders are slacked;
then make the needle pierce both of the parts behind to reach inside them, in two other shoulders that are opposite each other;
And this is the proper method of treatment and it is most common.
Galen says this word, and no one bears witness to it.
One must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread in them.
the t: s crovnex.
And tell yourself when the worm is within the belly, if the incision is more swollen than other wounds in the belly,
The judgments of this wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
When you find a fresh wound with all its blood, just as the art has moved it. If you reset the intestines and the sutures, then apply powdered incense chalk on them.
If you reset the intestines and the sutures, then apply powdered incense chalk on them. And if the art has moved it, then apply any poultice that is at hand until the wound closes. lesse: don in such as heal d. Then treat the wound as with others, until it is healthy.
And if you have no medicine, then put on, as soon as it starts to move, soft cotton or old cloth; And move it two times a day until it is healthy.
For in certain cases, you need no other medicine besides when wounds are simple.
and if you doubt whether the wound affects the main limbs. or it is fitting that thou shalt mince a linen bandage with oil of tar and heat, or rose oil, And place it within the angles, and below the elbows;
And if it feels pain or swelling in bulk, and this often happens, If the black wine enemas are warm, and primarily where the swelling comes up to the intestines;
e:cs the p;
The intestines called "jeun" cannot heal when they are diseased. and it's because of the inflammation of veins within them, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and its closeness to the nervous system.
And if the bezoar falls from the wound, it should also be returned as with the intestines while they are fresh.
; t. For there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the joints. and place the two heads hanging from the part above the wound towards easing the extraction when the tendons tear, and the wound bow.
in s, then as a les, or. It happens:
When the intestines are bloated, and the wound is small, If it can be restored in some people,
For I have seen a man who was afflicted with stomachache from a lance,
And there was the wound on the right side of the stomach, And it was filled and became a fistula, causing discharge and winds;
I applied treatment as best I could, and did not stop until it was healed, along with the suppuration.
And when I saw it bound together, I doubted that the patient had harm within his belly. and there was no harm found, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and some experienced ones said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied off in this manner: after him le. And when the numbness affects the mouth, place it between the two lips,
Then apply another warmth as before, until the wound is completely healed.
And cut the wound. If the head so pierces into the intestines, and brings no harm to the patient,
And if one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal.
And in this manner: Take the head of that intestinal string and cleanse it thoroughly, First tie to the head of this thread a fine flax twisted string. Then put the thread through the needle and sew along the intestine, and reset it in place.
And this method of stitching from inside is not different than following the course of trust and hope;
ite so that f, in the same:
of a fistula, or if there are any He says that every wound or pus-filled lesion, when it ages, should be called 'fistula'. and especially if it is raised and healed unevenly.
should he:fleur le t s, and de lest they as the c ici cese by;t les is notewis sp*; vujne aul. The cat's, so number in it:they excer people them, which m. Do not s. They chroze I want to formse an-d Et il est aussi cassé comme les plumes d'un oiseau;
and sometimes clear as a sharp bowstring, and at other times thick. and sometimes too little, and at other times enough.
by the olt: This occurs solenly from one of the seven reasons:
It is known as, by the smallness of blood or body; Or due to its malevolence; . 1, and not: When there is too much bowing; When there is rust, and the matter is of poor quality; When the medicines are not good for the treatment; Or because corruption is a form of plague; Or due to the property in that area being late, digestion is slowed, health is delayed, and prone to fail naturally; For there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and medical treatments in the section.
Or it is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment for a fistula, which is done through handwork.
It's said that a fistula occurs in all members of the body; ſi lesd. Tort. When it occurs on the face, or within the intestines, or in the bladder, or on any of the ribs. Or upon the spine at the back, or on any joint of hands or feet.
And all the fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, with only labor and ignorance involved.
And if there is any fistula that does not reach the point I mentioned, and you have faith in healing. And les plaies or les mouchons, et li ne is le belie que soie et the mains. The wounds tu ie escohes to reach and that the oin les points li a li unt de and as dents ou est du: And l’accurately lae the way itu les f.
If the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle thread of lead. For the joints bend around its twisted nature;
and if there are abscesses on the hands that cannot be well searched for by touch. if the enema is administered through one of these openings,
and so it ne sont they tu:
Then carefully feel with your power of touch to determine if there is bone or nerve involved, which has been severed.
and ask the patient about the pain felt upon pressing with your hand, and where it is located;
and when you truly know the location where it is, and if it is away from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, Or in any of those remedies I have told you, if using this poultice as I have instructed.
Or in any of those remedies I have told you, if using this poultice as I have instructed. and where the bone is exposed and corrupted joints that are within; then treat until it is healed.
and of any: Then he applies tight bandages with medicinal herbs, and raises them up to the head of the abscess.
Then he applies tight bandages with medicinal herbs, and raises them up to the head of the abscess. until the medicine dissolves the excess that is located at the base;
and then he applies soothing salve of clean wax, until it becomes healthy.
they isnt ement the text ict the symptom
And if the bone is affected by a fistula, cover it with a cow's skin. If your veins or principal limbs are afflicted, as we have said;
And if the foulers les choses which are here. Then treat various strange matters until they are healed;
And if it is not healed, return to its original state as before. Know that you must not go to the source:
if you uncover and search until you reach the bottom, And remove all decay, then return it to its place.
and if in such a way he is well again, that's good. If not, know that the decay is too great, you cannot go there. if there is no other remedy than with the cautery of nature.
and if there is a small piece of decayed bone, and you can extract it with tongs, the s; and ou:
Et s'il y a beaucoup d'os cassés, ne pas en laisser aucun des uns et des autres.
et si le morceau est retourné dans une direction opposée, et qu'il n'y ait ni erreur ni peur. s'il y a des fissures ou de l'humidité et du pus, et libère les os.
the same: And let it rest until it is rolled around the bones,
Then they will have their bones more easily.
And if it is a large bone, like the thigh or hipbone, If you repeatedly move so much that the decay reaches all the bones completely black. Then heal the wound;
And if there is a large part of decay, and it reaches near the bone; meu, then with a too s the blood, at itles you do not m unt1e on:
And I will tell you of a case of an abscess that occurred in his leg. and if I take as an example to aid in your work.
There was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg of a cause that came from within the body,
As long as the matters came to the leg and were carried away from a large abscess, and there was no need for it to be opened.
but due to their madness they worked on it so much that they opened the abscess. and a great deal of matter escaped from it, turning into a fistula, and so much waste piled up that all excreted water and mucus from the body.
; younge theyre a�uze; it: (in a f : Oud eccess—e Middle English:
As long as he is called to me, and I see his leg and the remedies with which it was treated. and what needed to be done through the pores of the entire body; and the body turned red as in youth, and had a citrus color.
be the ou la; c:n ne so that in les saind
And I found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
So, I hurried and cut into one of the joints until I discovered a part of the bone, And I found it rotten and pus-filled, and the infection reached up to the inner parts of the bone;
they shoot la: est le t li Jekchaplié I
And I began to heal the wound with alkaline remedies for long periods, but it could not be sealed.
And then you begin again, and discover the bone as before,
And I found continued decay in the bone, its socket, and then the fracture, and I attempted to reunite it.
But I could not join them within an inch of bone, and the injury worsened greatly, so that aret.
et pour ce que il est trop fatigué. and because of my fear of his death. For often I would weep for the evacuation of blood, but he was entirely healthy again,
For often I would weep for the evacuation of blood, but he was entirely healthy again, Et there was born in the place of the bone a hardness, and it was of good arrangement and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither on approach nor departure.
And stretch the head so you can treat the corrupted flesh at its origin. And reveal the flesh over the site where you see it swell, ensuring that the swelling does not move the flesh. And place a bladder or a splint below the bone to move the fractured cartilage; And it is necessary to do as much as one can see and feel the decay, and still further at another time.
And if the bone is decayed, does not open, and the decay is in the middle or on one side, If the skin is fully revealed, then place a coal underneath it.
and then sew from one part to the other the decay, and make the suture lengthwise of the decay as mentioned earlier.
and if the decay is at the joint, cut the corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it contains on the other side;

If there is a swelling on the knuckle of the hand or the tip of the foot, that thing is very strong. However, it still must be inquired how that swelling came about. And purify the area in all ways you can, but let neither vein nor nerve work against you.
And instruct them to use a chisel and files for such bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance. and their size, subtlety, grandeur, minuteness, and hardness. and therefore it is necessary to equip each kind of work with its instrument.
And you shall know which instrument your work will show you to use, according to the knowledge of this art. and it will reveal the signs and ways of diseases; If you consider the instrument needed according to what is appropriate for it.
By fire The head shrinks or by reason of density, or by lack of use.
and when you have taken the medicine for that erosion through the course of medicines, and they do not help, If necessary, cover that limb up to its location where the ulceration occurs. if the patient's ailment causes death or great harm due to limb failure, which is greater.
if the patient's ailment causes death or great harm due to limb failure, which is greater. and its signs are such that the member becomes blackened as if burned by fire, so it is not c. When it spreads throughout the entire body; if you hurry with the poultice,
And if it is due to the sting of any poisonous creatures such as a sea scorpion and serpent and others like them.
If there is swelling in the head of the toe, if it's a blister, do not give any space for it to come up to the hand.
If it reaches up to the hand, grip the joint firmly so that the dislocation does not extend to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, grasp at the bone; and if it passes through the bone, it is a death. And there are no remedies except in the quantity of its virtue;
and de la main he writes. ougre;
When it comes to the arm or leg, cover the entire limb. And if it rises up the leg, cover the hip joint.
And if it comes above the hip, there is no other remedy but for the healer to do as follows:
with pto beau lign: Et étend un ministre les membres en bas, et un autre ministre l'autre membre vers le haut. And split open the cartilage that is between the two joints at one span wide until the bone is exposed;
Then wrap or suture it and put on each side a layer of linen so that the suture does not touch the healthy flesh; And it brings to the patient other injuries and abscesses.
And if bleeding occurs while working, you should cauterize the wound promptly. or apply healing powders to it; then return to your medication until it is completed.
by them on the les t; also lde is to go that yout and here:
And I shall tell you what happened to a certain man who fell asleep on straw:
It happened one night that it appeared like an ember of fire,
and the scorching came first to his right foot, so much that it affected the entire foot;
:
After long periods, the dislocation returns again, and it comes to me.
And I address the resulting issues after bodily purification of the body, and it cannot cease the dislocations.
and there was a necessity for me to treat the hand, and I did not hope that I could restore the matter; And I feared as if I were cutting off my hand, that he would die. For the strength of his body was weakened; and he lost all hope, returning to his homeland. and took a coin from his hand, and healed.
as the inue be scso fat;
At no time does an abscess appear at its natural place, and it persists so long that it forms a large gathering of pus. And then they heal and burst open, and the pus flows out, and the natural orifice remains closed like a vessel; and the skin above is as fine and delicate as a thin cloth torn; s the ond C't la cjn:093 and they niglie with as de not m. If one or:
But if it is so elongated that it reaches to the bone at its center, it is called "fistula";
And if it wraps around so finely that they completely envelop it as silk-like threads; And it does not heal due to its decay.
And if you are certain that the skin is hardened, and there is no infection at all. and the skin is dry of flesh, then treat with a cleansing enema thusly:
it ist; that. Then one uses the Egyptian medical clyster, which is made as follows: Take alum, and oil, and litargo, in equal amounts, and put them to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine is red and thickens as honey does;
 And by applying an enema to his belly, and straining the bladder. Then leave the medicine in for two hours, then extract it by squeezing out.
Do this as many times as necessary until the belly is cleansed and urine flows freely again.
les quet ques ne ble: When this remedy is not available, take ashes of wood from the grapevine and pour water over it.
Then strain it, and use as an enema, until you are certain that the bowels are well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian remedy nor the water of ashes will work. heal CHT: When you cleanse with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has the property to purify and wash. and the wine causes to dry out the wound.
and after you have done this, and you ensure that the wound is well purified, ond.
And it is necessary for you to immobilize firmly, and do so with rose oil mixed with wine. or you enemas the body with various medications and salves, of which I have mentioned their properties and treating with balms.
and if the latches are too small for the chest, and the cannula of the enema cannot enter, dont lesse liust any la; Flemse. Or basilisk unguent, as long as it is spread;
And if the wound is too wide, then leave it so that either you can apply this or a clyster may enter therein;
And if the peritoneum has a large hernia above it, then cover with either a cap or place it lower where it is located. When the bow is in full draw, do not let it snap back. and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, if the bow parts in such a manner that it goes as low as possible where it is,
and if you cannot cut the skin off as you see fit, if aligned in this manner: so the bow slightly inclines forward, and let nothing of the bow remain untouched, (s. s. ia t
And they extend over a linen cloth that covers the entire breast. Then apply your force to return the protruding breast tissue to its original place a bit wider than before. Then spread sufficient ointment over another piece of fabric according to the quantity of the protrusion. And place it on the pile of straw against the breast to alleviate the bowing, and do not remove the large bandage for many days afterwards.
And those who are under the pile of straw on their chest often have it removed to alleviate the bowing. And know whether it is poison, stool, sufficient, poorly digested, or indigestion causing the bowing.
And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess.
When your treatment has extended in such a manner that you see the swelling under the breastbone. if you know that the breast is already hardened, and approach it with care;
in lesse. If a different bandage is used, renew the ointment.
And if the milk becomes indigestible after many days, understand that the breast does not produce any more. And if subtle venoms linger for long periods, do not despair of health,
the following them: t. So take so fard, the said.
If bowel inflammation occurs within the chest after many days, know that the breasts do not hurt.
And if a woman's breasts are drying up and become infected, apply the nearest remedies of moistened and dried herbs in substance and power. :
Take a balm of laudanum, and mix with rose oil, and boil it in equal measure with old wine.
Then apply it and use it as needed; this same method also makes a thicker mixture when honey is cooked. When the laudanum balm is not available,
When you take myrrh and oil and incense, crush it and powder it with honey when placed over the fire. Then mix it into a paste, wrap in a cloth, apply to the breast, and never insert an aristolochia stem long. and roots of holy basil, which is like flour mixed with bran;
and roots of holy basil, which is like flour mixed with bran; lign: tho cd.l's s e 1guarde bonme ; If the joint is extended, and not treated with this remedy,
If the joint is extended, and not treated with this remedy, Then you must say that the infection is at its origin, and it puts pressure on the bone, or hard parts of the body, or ligaments. If the treatment for an abscess as we have previously mentioned.
et:n; to la m. Do not.
Panaric is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the palm. or in the foot, or sometimes occurs on other fingers.
and when it is neglected, and not properly cared for, an abscess may form. the same le temps youtir ine:
And it comes to bone erosion so close that there is painful odor when it reaches, and the shoulder joints are wide, and the color is bluish.
When you treat as we have said in the section, if the remedy does not help at all, if it is appropriate to cut into it. Remove all the excess that is lodged under the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The fire-cauterization is greatly helpful when the bone is healthy, and the nail (or claw) is intact.
and if the nail or claw becomes stiffened, begin to prod, and scrape, If it is necessary to place a staff under the nail from which blood points. and hold it upwards, gently and subtly stopping the bleeding. and apply on the remaining blood healing substances that are burning and corrosive to remove everything;
When the decay is within the bone, cut through it and treat deeply, because as long as the bone decays there, it cannot heal.
And if you see the elbow decaying, make a cut on one of its sides, as mentioned before, then treat until it becomes healthy again,
And if it is thrust, and you strike it, and it feels great pain, then firstly you should numb it. Then clip the fingernail of the thumb gently by cutting across underneath.
and then it's acheptis in pain, which is the unguen de grient de les maladus to the tial.
If this occurs, then place something upon which to soothe.
The joint that is pushed into some men's hands by chance is all flesh. tile:
And none of these arise at the root of the joint where birth is found among our bones. He who is born with any disability cannot move. And he who is born with a joint deformity may be able to move;
The stature of those who are plump is somewhat light in nature. the est nait. Do that and to est que li ou yout and so as much;s:
Those who are born at the root of a joint are very difficult to treat: hold them with both hands.
In those that are born or will be next, it is necessary to first bind the roundness up to the bone. then bind the bone with a suitable thread, then treat until it is healthy again.
lesse of the est prucht that m lik le benesli et la pe's in t gin they ne ce quenassus;l... icint to them.
If it is fitting to treat such a swelling, so that they may heal according to their natural forms. Then place between two pads or cloths moistened with oil of roses, ensuring they do not stick together. Or you put between two pieces of fine linen until the wound is healed, as it should be.
lessti sont all; s. oug said so far: CII80 t par lk le do they he ne bon, and them to-d o s f the bavazmeds et le t c unt ; Flexte; que Ie as i est the main.
Of evil spirits
These are large veins swollen with excessive melancholy, that come to various body parts.
And happens more in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than others.
It is necessary then to administer him once a purging of colic, and then strengthen the veins in the groin area.
The treatment with iron is as follows: one method is to bind it and bleed until the blood turns black. and the other way is to lift the vein and drain completely.
the ben con tr's. Then straighten the leg of the afflicted from above the hip down to the part below the knee. then cut the vein in one place or two or three, of a width broad.
then extract and pull the black blood to your hand from one end to the other until as much has been taken as the virtue of the sick person can bear.
; cannot be qui:s rion the ece isnt they vile.
And begins the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, causing discomfort to the patient.
The movements of the limb should follow this manner: raise the affected leg if it has much hair on it, then place it in a bath, and let the limb soak in hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
they has the line.
Then work the skin at the joint, and scrape the vein from each side, as much as it is felt when touched.
and when it appears red and black, and if inserted into the skin it seems like a white rope;
then insert the thread underneath, as much as it rises above the skin, and then tie it gently to the joint;
Then bandage it at another location three fingers upwards; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears then lift with your thumb, as you have done before, and bind to another splint as initially instructed.
then cut a different size piece or more if needed, then lift it up, and tie around the second toe.
a c, so that li by le col (or: if it's... Cordon.  theymed the lesmz JJ. If they provide in Arab:n:n; donner:t on e te de fact, and so : d, t or the; but n 'cfafter.
And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then insert a needle at every strong, thick thread. And remove the lump and pull it, then insert it through a slit, and turn your hand on both sides, until it's gone. And ensure that it does not flip over, for if it does, one cannot draw or lift it out, and this can harm the patient.
the same pas they n'JJeraise: veget. The Chir Jad that not often.
When the vein is strained, twisted, and wrapped together as a whole, and it is not straight, as we have said. If it must be cut crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously stated.
If it must be cut crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously stated. The shape of the iron used to clamp the vein should be curved, and do not cut through it so that you don't harm the vein.
; to ph�; and theirs a draid on line they do you the t.t0 by c: How old that n'e o retts
From civil veins
This vein is found in legs, warm parts where there are no grass or trees, and on land without any moisture;
And it may appear elsewhere besides legs, and this happens from the rotting that comes under the skin,
t; Tail f: Go:s. Do not:
When the signs of this vein's beginning are such that a great inflammaturms into the leg. Then there is a change of color, and the vein begins to protrude outwardly as the root of a plant.
When you remove it completely with a cloth or two fingers and half an inch deep; and the incision is made at:
Let it hang during on the leg, and every time it is not in place, wrap around the bone, and bandage. And if it is too long, cut a portion of it, wrap the remainder, and do not cover it at its root until completely freed. because if you cut it, it may enter the heart and cause an abscess or decay therein, leading to serious illness.
by b.
When this vein is treated with five or six long palms (hits), it occurs... and then one hour later it was with me, which came from six long palms (hits), and when you strike it, pours out a bit of blood or pus, and penetrates all the way to its depth...
and so it empties the material within, and after being cleansed with various medicinal injections, no longer festers for a day, then heals like abscesses.
:t; don'll t� the te; (CJum. And it often results from a fall, causing great injury; treat accordingly as we have said before.
From worms that arise between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "ox illness" because it often occurs with oxen,
And it is a small worm that exists between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body going up and down. And he feels great pain throughout from limb to limb, as long as it is wrongly placed where it goes, and jumps out.
and is caused by the putrefaction of various humors, such as those that come in worms, slugs, and roundworms or belly.
And doubt of its severity is evident when it travels through the body, rising to the head and reaching the eye; At times it reenters, destroying the joint; and this happens often.
When you see them being bled and milked, one cannot do it unless they are going:
If it is necessary then tie the head above and below a strong ligament tightly,
Then cut through and along the bone, and if the vein is fully out of place inside the artery, and you cannot find it. If a fire cautery is used on it, until it heals.
And the greatest harm that it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said.
And if you see it coming or near to his eye, firmly hold the eyebrow, then bind above, and lay a bandage.
And it is necessary for the patient to use remedies that purify the body of corrupt fluids due to evil humors.
and if he is infected with putrefied meats.
theys’t; the, or 1 ;t of t que ne: m ils beaude tu can find that s'est il est ault et les carg. The line. And so-pro This illness is called 'wakiry' on our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs. And then it moves from one member to another; and here is what I tell you.
I was called by an ill woman, and I saw some swelling in the vein of her arm;
iste me: ïn de t ons that heal fetrapte ome. Sooner than any other thing, just as liquid silver when it flows from one place to another.
The pain departs from there and shifts into the shoulder.
And then shortly after it runs through the entire body, until it reaches the other arm.
by s;
I marveled greatly at how it moved from member to member, for I had never before experienced this illness in such a manner. Nevertheless, I believed that many others have felt pain moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it as in the woman;
. And for this reason appear those strained windsweeps;
And according to this reason appear those who are afflicted, and have wet bodies and veins restored.
And when you see treating this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, if you loosen above and below slightly, and then wrap around until the swelling from tightness is reduced at its place. and burn the spot; and if it is not visible to your eyes,
f, que la:nus li estra; that vii chatose te sonze by kud; ougbtro di se they do not; the same c. If you give by H. I. The Sim.faits.
Of arrowheads
Arrowheads are of various kinds, depending on their appearances and where they come from in the body.
The variety among them is such that there are some with large points, small ones, those with barbs, and adhesive types. the ite, please comment on, then heu (you know that les viles: And that which flows from any limb in two ways: either from a principal member where it bleeds.
Or as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it flows from any location of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you hereafter are apparent: ane. And when these bad signs are not evident to you, and the arrow is not entirely embedded, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
And when signs of head trauma occur as the arrow pierces the bone and slips back out from above the brain. is when there are blindness and swelling and twitching of the eyes, and inflammaturgy of the tongue, and muscle spasms and confusion of thought, and bile-filled vomitings. ; The context c (marntut ene t; And it is as if hair grows from the wound's white wetness, like as of blood.
And if these signs appear to you, proceed with the treatment and extract the arrowhead if it is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it comes out or is close to the body is as if it were embedded in a hard object, not hollow. And occasionally the patient moves as well as hairs do, with black blood in their wound, and come coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. Then they have no doubt that death is imminent.
And the sign of arrow shafts is that the patient's forehead has no foam at the wound site, and their throat swells, and the ill person changes complexion, and they gasp loudly and crave cold air.
: the
When an arrow falls or from the belly, perhaps it leaves behind no trace of indigestible flesh.
If the arrow falls into the belly and there is no exit through the intestines, then there is no hope in treatment or extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and the urine stops flowing while coming out feverishly, and the patient feels intense pain: believe that the wound is fatal.
Other limbs, depending on the face and neck and throat and shoulder and hip and spine and loins and thighs, and all resembling limbs are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to him that an arrow entered the root of his nose. I attempted it, and healed from another side past the fatty tissue of the ear, and was perfectly well.
And when striking with an arrow shaft that hits into the fat above the bone below. and the arrow was replaced, unable to reach further than the tip toward its base. And it did not touch the arrowheads was with a louite to all. Li nerfs dores en lieu de la eires qui estroi les pointe of the chet cogniers; andres et si leuies sient il nee les.
And a spear struck through the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears.
I wounded the Barbarians, and deceived them as much as I could, and the Christian remained unharmed.
And pierced with an arrow was a man who had his belly exposed, and I thought he would die.
it. ça the me de la:nf ifs forme. I cut near the arrowhead, and manipulated it, broke its tip, without any harmful event.
And if to a man an arrow falls on his head or back, and the wound is immediately closed thereon.
and the arrow remains within him without changing its natural state, (C: s issues MSPut;
And see one other man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and there was a severe wound.
And it remains in such a way that he suffers great pain; and many others like this.
And pierces an arrow into one of the king's nobles, who was in his back, they may be not quite the matter he prek.
I was called for treatment three days after it occurred; I found the wound very narrow.
I examined it with great subtlety and did not feel any pain. and he felt numbness and pain behind his right ear. the ous t set to l’s e le est les main, allisle benfer; Don's so: bonstrare s and n's, neither its...
I place on it the plaster dressing with soothing and digestive properties, as the joint is not swoln. And to me appeared the joint of the arrow shaft.
And to me appeared the joint of the arrow shaft. I put on the plaster dressing immediately, and tended to the wound thoroughly, so that the patient remained for a long time.
if a, and not f it, foret la oufswer as s that the t incaad; That is; healudie l's les suits to try ocult. When applied to a wound, use corrosive medicinal vinegar by hand until it is opened.
and attempted, feeling the tip of the arrow returning to its place; then I inserted it into the wound with that corrosive vinegar until the arrowhead was clearly visible.
byssi onze la l’m.
And then you arrange so that the wound is where I insert the pincers, and grasp it on both sides, and cannot be removed.
Then I did not cease to subtly apply and devise various methods of immobilization until I finally succeeded in a day with well-made pincers. according to how the shape will come at the end of this chapter, I continue treating it and keep the wound closed.
And the physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored. And then it is healed thoroughly, and the wound is sewn up, and the patient is entirely healthy again.
Now I have told you about the quality of arrow extractions, they.
But wise masters know little about it, and what is currently happening and failing. In truth, nine works, and nine instruments are involved in the descent of extraordinary things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows do not come from members where they are lodged only according to two ways: the et de is ne les m
And that which is thrown by its entrance into flesh, it is an arrow entering the muscles, and will not be able to move again.
And if it does not go now, leave it as long as the flesh is rotting around it, and let the exit be healed.
And also if it is fixed in the bone and cannot come out, leave it as such for several days, and move each day.
lecke an English C's but en Francuit contin.
And if an arrow is lodged in the body such that it cannot be seen, then surround it with all ointments. Et line.
And if you cannot by the stretching of the wound, and by the deepening of the arrow. and there are no bones or nerves or veins, as long as the wound remains large; And treat the arrowhead if you can, and if it has in the arrowhead ears to which it is attached,
And treat the arrowhead if you can, and if it has in the arrowhead ears to which it is attached, If the bone is broken by two parts which you can move, and then break or bend the arrows' ears as much as you are able to extract it.
and then break or bend the arrows' ears as much as you are able to extract it. and carefully ensure not to fracture the arrows as you would draw them out more strongly.
And if you cannot do it once, let the vein reach its limits before pulling, for extraction is painful. And if the bleeding causes a contrary reaction, follow the treatment as we have described in this chapter;
and beware of cutting nerves or veins, and use devices as you know to extract the arrow without danger.
If he chose. For it is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot do so, place according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, or opens something within it, where the skin is swollen to be seen or felt distinctly.
Cut then on top of it, as long as the pincers can grip it, and then extract it; if it shoots out now.
cust that prud:
If it cannot come out, let it remain for now, then resume extraction as long as there are fragments remaining.
And if the arrowhead is in place, remove it completely;
And if the arrow shaft has been cut, and you need to administer a poultice, then apply this appropriate instrument; it does not be:
When an arrowhead is embedded, place a pointed instrument within it to ease extraction.
And if the arrowhead is touched, one must scrape off all the flesh around where the poison is, if possible. Then treat the wound as needed.
s: are not be heal de le t one't son.
And be careful not to puncture the vein or nerve, then extract it, and then close the wound if necessary. And treat until it is completely healed.
The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; and here is its shape:
And there are many ways to manage it: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow shafts.
Of common veins in the body then p. ignee:
This is to know: two millstones behind the ears, called "herbche." and the two arteries that are in two temples visible; and two veins that are in two temples of the ears, called "aspire" (meaning breath or aspiration). The vein near the forehead; and the vein at the temple area. and the two arteries that are above the eye. and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "Augeherich". de he quill;
There are five veins commonly cut in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it's on the left side of the ribcage, and they call it "the chief vein" in common parlance. and the middle one is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic (veins),  And they call it "the loose guts of the belly," located under the ribcage. And that which can be touched and clearly seen above the abdomen.
And the dislocation is between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two loaves;
And in the leg where there are three veins: one is below the arch of the left side ribcage. and the second vein is on the right side arch: and the vein called "nose", which is in the ankle of the other side.
In the other leg are three veins below those.
The healing of veins that are behind the ears helps with old headaches and migraines; and its quality which I tell you, is to raise the patient's head.
and its quality which I tell you, is to raise the patient's head. If youre: As long as both veins appear behind the ears on either side of the head: Next, take hold of your thumbs, and where you feel hair below your thumbs, secure them.
Then take the lancet, and push it down to the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein above. And wrap and cover with leather both veins well, two fingers' breadth apart, and let blood flow until it ceases.
Then bind and compress it, until it is healed.
And I have already instructed on incision and cauterization in the first book.
; The same. And swelling, habitual inflammation, along with watery tears in their eyes.
and the quality of the physician is such that I say: and it is so that the patient's veins are distant from his neck until the two channels appear clearly; by:
Then gently press with your thumb on the vein towards your index finger, and insert the lancet above. Gently press upwards on the vein, and make an incision as you have done in two other veins before, then cut the blood according to your necessity.
Then gently lift the malady with your finger and place it over the vein for an hour, then cover it with a piece of cotton.
And then apply the bandage firmly, and leave it until healed; and we have spoken of their swelling and extraction, where the book begins.
The healing of the vein on the forehead is just as valuable for headaches and ancient skin diseases, and migraines, and redness.
And its quality is that patients twist their necks to the extent necessary for the vein to appear. the uch scarli are not far, and jume ce:E;
And place a sharp object against the vein, and hold it with your hand or another tool, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see. Then provide the patient with a collar and tie the vein so that it is secure and not crossed by any wrinkles or creases from being too wide.
However, it is not necessary for the folds to be too tight; and avoid being twisted, as the bone may protrude, and there's a chance of breaking the veins when they are thin.
the se car other by theta and there at that s in.
And the quality of their sickness is such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting a certain link, as before.
Then he is placed in his bed, and let his illness be treated with ointment, some of the long and wide linen cloth, for there is no chariot.
, and let him deteres lor poilz cest cholee esproveit est to let sait isi unt, pour tout li couvide de bif menut a tet: est douce la car il est de his qui avent le fx. And soie of les prist est ce dit onement beausir, et le d l’on les chole esprenest, en ekin and par isle de.
The sickness of the vein is like nausea, and dizziness, and illnesses caused by travel. as it resembles migraines and redness that comes upon the face, especially when long-standing;
and the nature of this sickness is such that it tightens around the neck, then stretches to the patient's left hand. . For the veins do not open well at first, but blood will now begin to flow.
and do not pull too hard, make blood flow according to your need, then leave it overnight, for it is most quickly restored.
The healing of the two chilblains assists in stretching the vein, and at the onset of meandering diseases, and various illnesses, and scabs, and corrosions, and herpes, and itchiness.
The quality of healing is such that the patient withdraws their head from both sides, as we have said. And let the master be standing over the patient's head, and the patient seize with one hand.
Then seal the vein with a long strip somewhat wide, then tie off the blood promptly as needed.
Next, repair in the other vein, then release the ligature, and gently constrict around the veins moderately. that the patient does not strain themselves; and let them rest until morning, so that the wound can be dressed.
in line byt. The healing of vein lips above assists in coagulation within the mouth, and decay of gums, and splits of lips, and ulcers and abscesses.
And its quality is for the healing to make the patient sit before you, and strain his neck as I have said. then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left. ci; s c.n ze nek; Thus dislocate both sides, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
Thus dislocate both sides, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, If you dislocate the larger of each side, and do so with both veins above and below it, for they are in the same manner.
From underneath the tongue the said of he est m. If you s not and sedje se que it’s they so that ne: heal pand: 380s les le t c, and to c.
And the quality of a sailor is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts his tongue, and looks down each side for a black vein.
Then cleanse both thoroughly, but do not go too deeply as they are the arteries.
The veins of the wrists that one commonly cleans in two ways.
When you grasp it at all on one side with a wide leather strap or fine net as sharp as a saw, and it is called "enesil." And they are wide and subtle according to the breadth and length of the veins. The form of the leather strap is very well-known, and it's wide as you can see:
they c. And this is the form of the olive bile:
and it is more subtle pointed, and for collecting subtle veins, or where there is subtle yellow blood.
The sanicle of the hypochondriac region, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, and neck, and groin, and belly.
he ne soffic le Tirolog: la ou main; When it bleeds from an artery, if blood flow worsens, then as I have said, one must staunch the bleeding. And it should not be painfully pressed with a finger but cut like a hazelnut.
And if the base does not open clearly, then one must extract it and replace it with another. If you wish to locate any veins of his, or bring them into place within the arm where they are hidden: they become clearly visible. And apply a bandage to the incision site, as we have said.
And if you see the extent of the wound, it is necessary to raise and pull out the arm, to touch the area as long as you can feel the hairs. s (1 lesse he: qe t; that theyt; the in a que se :
And guard so you do not injure the artery when you see the place swolled, for it is of the artery; flee from it then.
And if you see a protrusion upward as in the urine of a child, and it is red and slender, know that it is from an artery. Quickly then, raise your foot on length, and remove the protrusion if attached, as often happens.
If it is on the arm, leave it as such, and do not move it for the patient; and let fear be upon him, and do not move it until it is straightened.
And if the wound is not healed and it swells up, and the medication has not been prescribed, cut the artery if it opens; for the head of the wound retracts, and it becomes infected.
And take a piece of styptic herb, crush it, and take one half and apply until the next day.
If the vessel is blocked, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
and the blockages are not in various positions due to a small wound opening or joint flexibility of the arm.
The vein's constriction helps by draining blood above and below it from the body. in the cj's:t car lesi sirt cas by se kfle by the way by tue, but; and ses sukkoth this. The line; ils dise with theta.
And it is necessary for the wound to be dressed so that the nerve below may heal, and if it pierces too deeply, then the nerve is reached. And it swells and the inflammation becomes severe, and perhaps cannot heal.
And this nerve is opened many times, and if it cannot be located in any home due to its subtlety, then it must be healed with the instrument of cautery; and avoid touching the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is tension between the two nerves, they cause great pain.
The treatment of headaches helps, drawing blood from the forehead and soothing eyes;
And it is necessary to apply pressure at the top of the olive or myrtle area because it is the most effective of all treatments, as there are no nerves or vessels in that place.
and e: And sometimes the lice swell in certain men, as must occur the first time, but it does not harm anything. The quality of health is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about medicine is that it is not practiced solenly for the purpose of maintaining health,
as well as they are also: Et sois la sanie faite dans l'une des trois veines qui se nomment ainsi : céphale, facial et basilaire. And it is to be cleansed at the beginning of pregnancy and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And it should be cleaned out for the first day or two, after 2 to 3 hours or days as needed.
The healing that is applied for illnesses does not have a determined time, but when needed, it can be done at any hour or night, in all hours and always.
And it is not necessary to treat children until they are fourteen years old or women who are carrying for only three-quarters of a month up to the seventh. Nor should you heal the elderly who have passed sixty years.
by far la so f: ous that n's (and nelement they o;tura and ses c lx. If it has too much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract excess from the intestines, which is harmful to the principal limbs.
Ne neither should those who are too fond of meats nor drunkards partake so much that they become overindulgent or addicted.
and one should avoid indulging in activities such as after experiencing colic attacks, vomiting, stomach troubles, frequent sexual relations with women, manual labor, staying up late or gatherings, and anything else that affects the vitality, whether by injury to the arm or body.
Then carefully balance the humors, if they are heavy, with meats, drinks, and medicines, if you have permission to do so.
Then give them a bath, unless something prevents it, in order to balance the blood.
and cleanse the veins around that area as we have said;
. Do not f
And let it be tied and raised, and let the sinew be higher than that of which you are treating, and rub the arm two or three times.
Then stretch the ligament moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, it cannot be corrected without intervention;
And then rub the lower part of the arm until the veins swell and feel warm.
d; Don's. That the vein does not break upon being struck with a blow. For there are veins that escape as cords on the armlet and some which are flat from swelling. if when placed above the flame, it retracts into itself and cannot open the vein, thus it is one of these.
the de f 1 ; (or so com ine ne ond’s
If the vein works on the first attempt, it is good; if not, restart even further below that level where eagerly it was set, unless the bone is swollen.
If the bone is swolculed and the patient hopes, let it be a day or two, without binding the arm. perhaps he will have abscesses; do not go into the bath, then resume cleansing if it pleases him.
the t line con scfar in an. <f (sul fat; and:
And perform the work somewhat swiftly so that the wound may swell; for this often happens when the injury is small.
If you see the wound swelling, do not repeat the irrigation, and apply a little oil dressing, as it lightens the body with blood loss and softens this area with the oil.
And thus apply the oil dressing to each vein you treat, so as to stop the course of blood.
this de la dur:
When it comes to large abscesses that occur often, especially when the vein opening is small at that time. If done hastily, place a damp sponge in warm water and salt for a little while, and strain it for an hour.
And after the blood has drained from the vein, and if it remains at the site for several days without any blackness or greenish discoloration, then there is no harm. (fust; Etienne that the lisert by themdous c
And often an abscess and appearance of infection occur on the lower part of the spine; therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find a soft spot under pressure from your hand, then that is a sign of illness. Do not place anything as we have mentioned on it, for there may be a risk to the artery; but apply a dry plaster first to harden the area, then treat with another remedy until healed.
And address each wound according to its severity and the color of the blood.
If the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see a large one, let it drain until it becomes subtle; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
And one who is pale and weak, and in need of bloodletting, should be given a wider cut, resulting in larger veins.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and sustain him with little and often, and you must sustain by cutting across rather than puncturing.
This manner of healing prevents blood deterioration and nerve compression, and it is preferable to the long or wide dislocation.
For those who need their bodies healed from dislocation, it is proper to give them pounded wheat in apple cider vinegar; if they are chilled, soak the affected area three or four times.
And if he has a cold constitution, warm the dislocation with pounded wheat in syrup or honey-based syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, with an aromatic syrup.
And if it palms at the wound site, after the release of much blood, one should apply a gruel of charcoal and sweet-smelling subtle syrup.
And utilize other things as mentioned in the chapter on fainting, for evacuating blood from veins.
And if he wishes to bandage the arms and dress them again another time, it is necessary when greatly weakened by excessive moisture, that they should be dried slowly in accordance with the quantity of their virtue continuously.
by; they can, and, such as s (concquest in the tt.
When you wish to heal another part, it should be healed on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body that has become overheated, and it causes fever; then it is necessary to drain a large quantity, and widen the vein until it bleeds profusely. then when you treat all aspects of health, and place your hand on the same spot where it heals, that no death comes at the time of bleeding. ue; (with:
And it is not necessary when you see the arm dislocated to make blood come out a second time, and the wound being closed, then firmly compress above. If it is swollen, extend the arm quickly, as this would be harmful.
but let it heal the second time; or if you see no flame at the wound, until the blood flow in the vein ceases completely. s. Tum: f. To-B; they should be:
If the vein is swollen, let it bleed freely without constriction, until the abscess is soothed.
And if it becomes necessary to bleed the blood a second time, from there at the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein within the arm is healed at the place of the wound near the head because it is composed thusly.
And the manner of healing is such that the patient holds their hand in hot water until the blisters are red.
then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, and then cleanse through it, not too broadly nor too long.
. Do so that:: theta it as long; she; by, in this they said p but n't f :pject, with thesis. I did you in sonte tigu;
And if it is like this, do not resist placing the hand in warm water again, for they place it more often during winter than summer.
and the healing of this vein is more successful than with any other wounds, where there are no vessels or nerves.
The healing of the salve for the right hand is suitable for all liver diseases, and this is how it's done:
Straighten the hand, and apply hot water, until the vein is emptied, if it can be seen. If the limb is twisted, and you cut along its entire length, do not injure anything else.
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are just under the skin's surface.
Then put the hand in warm water if it is frozen in the wound, so that no blood can escape from it.
And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and honey to the veins quickly for rapid healing, and do so for each wound.
The liniment of the hand in the left should be used for scrofula disease, and do as I have told you with the right.
d; to English: As with diseases of the marrow, retention of urine, and disease of the veins, and old ailments of hips and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the nature of his health is such that the patient often urinates in boiling water, and rubs over the veins until they scab. And it is near the ankle joint; and the veins are there, and from above the foot they go out much.
Cleanse the wound thoroughly or make it wider if at the ankle or knee joint, as necessary.
And if you cleanse the foot beneath, watch for veins that surface, and cleanse deeply as with a scraper; let the flesh adhere again.
And if the vein cannot be drawn out, reset the foot in water, and allow it to fully drain.
And so that he:t les que tji-line, and s alle emt; do the inle crospse er they n's D. Do not doubt of the nerve, as we have said, and thus do similarly with the other limb equally.
The source of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle joint, and its severing alleviates hip pain when it is due to heat in blood.
And the quality of its severing is that the patient lies between baths and stretches four fingers above the ankle by twisting it.
s se1: so the t the present ctocckce to ca <the cont�s. In this the in. It is ; don'veme. And instruct movements so you can grasp it, for the joint is loose, and it has been greatly pushed back by hands of men.
And instruct movements so you can grasp it, for the joint is loose, and it has been greatly pushed back by hands of men. And if you do not grasp it, take any part of it that opens or reaches the back of the hand and towards the little finger, and beware of nerves.
And make such a tie with the blood you see, and then loosen the ligament, and put on cotton and strain it; now it is healed.
;
Ventouses are made from horns or glass or ivory; and suction is performed in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this suction that does not strike is done in two ways: it can be at full heat, or without heat.
Et les deux autres sur les côtes du cou; et la vessie sous le menton; and the two others on the shoulders; and the veins under the armpits; and the veins between the two arms; and the veins of the two legs; :
et pour cela, il ne faudra à personne de mouiller davantage ; comme on le fait avec une veine saine : and it is not necessary for anyone that she be managed improperly or with fire, neither too hot nor too cold, in any disease arising from repletion until the entire body has been emptied.
And if for necessity of diseases or habits it is required to urinate, we shall encourage each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in between every time.
c. That said:cul[s.
And for those who experience swelling and redness on their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness of the eyes.
And those who experience blood drops in their mouths, with a protruded tongue and bleeding. And for there is bleeds of things; and they come blood flowing from the mouths: to stop it.
When we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to blow after III hours past noon.
The saint for the muscle assists in strengthening the head... which comes to them, and it must not be after the evacuation of all body fluids.
And this ventilation is upon the saint for the skull,
And it is not necessary for those of cold complexion or with catarrh to use, as it causes them great harm.
And for this reason, one should not use eyelash curling methods if they have cold ailments or headaches.
And those who become weak and feeble, and it is wise to place the arthritis painfulness with grippe, and they suffer from fever.
Ventilation within the neck is at the level of the windpipe and base of the skull, and thus it matters for extending the wound. and to severing of the spinal canal, and all parts thereof, including filling.
and one must not press too hard, because if it is held too firmly, it may cause injury to the liver or heart.
; it: lese and the bo5 i; please they c. It is the g—and so far. 6'transitulate byckmod :
Et il est dans le lieu du sang de la basilique; et il faut que vous commandiez au chirurgien qu'il exprime sa main en plaçant, qu'il n'entraîne l'artère, et ne vienne dégorgement de sang.
The inflammations from under the chin are caused by oral disease, and decay of gums, and various diseases that occur in the mouth; and they are in the places of the blood vessels of the two lips.
The inflammation in the shoulders is caused by an illness that arises from heat and swelling.
The swelling of joints is as much like three open veins on the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;
and commands the surgeon not to cut too deeply, because the bone is full of fat, and contains veins and arteries.
The suction cup located on the croup is like hemorrhoids at the foundation, and diseases below, it must be large and made of wool that needs to be well milked; and sometimes, if it were too fine, it would break; causing great wounds.
The leg suction cups drain openly because they draw blood from the entire body, and are like ancient pains of the kidneys, and bladder, and stones; they reset the months and ankles, and always weaken the body after long use, bringing paralysis in various dispositions.
The way to apply the suction cup is that you place it first empty and quickly draw out, then put on firmly, and move evenly, without stopping until you see the red and swolereness of the skin, and appear the dull color of blood; then remove, and pay attention to the body's condition because there are those who have a sore chin, and clear pores: it is sufficient to puncture once only, but make large and somewhat deep cuts; and suck lightly.
When the vein is large, it must be struck twice: the first time to finesse the path of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thin, it must be struck a third time; and when we wish to draw out little blood bit by bit, we do so only once at most.
And if we wish for a lot of blood, we must commence often; and if the vein is thin, it should be pierced through entirely, and its ends so that the vessels are cut cleanly.
in the; and f must lignée en c. Et ses que. If it is so, with oil of vipers, or soft almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
If it's for veins, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar substances.
And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balm resin, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
And if one treats him with tender care and wide shoulders, there is no need to apply oil.
However, it is necessary to wash after ventosation with rosy water, or cold water, or nettle water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or any similar liquid.
And those who have much sweat should rise easily, or lime water, and sumac, and similar things.
by the t, with n's (th.
Et it is not proper to apply heat before or during the bath, but after the bath one hour or two; and do not sleep after ventosation.
And it is necessary that he takes a warm bath when it needs to be vented and when he has been vented. And let the one who suffers from cholic not take a warm bath, if they are too hot or inflamed; by the. 1.
And drink moderately of wine, vinegar, and fatty meats.
And those with cold complexions should take a syrup of honey and moderately aged wine, as well as small amounts of drinks, young fowl, and ducklings.
And on the day that they fast, one must drink more than eat.
; s. And it should be cleansed of foreign bodies, but one must not do so unless they are heated with a drink.
The ventouses that are placed without causing pain are those put on the liver, and on a mouse (possibly an abscess or tumor), and podagra, and on the abdomen, belly, buttocks, and thighs, because such limbs cannot be pricked anywhere.
And they are made in order to draw blood from one body part to another. the and numbles et s;
And there is pain when it has blockage or stones, and you may attract the blockage by chance, or remove the stone from its place.
And so she does when placed upon the liver and intestines where there is retained windiness.
And these cups are made hollow to draw out as much as possible; and never are they filled with fire, nor ever plain water.
et b: the mairet, and t in s.
The shape of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
And it has two fingers of width and half the breadth for its handle, and it is fitted around the millieu with one small hole as to insert an awl.
And be of horn, smooth on one side so that it does not prick the patient when placed upon the limb;
text s.
And they are large or small depending on the diseases and condition of those who suffer from them.
For children's cupping is different from that of adults, and for thin ones it differs from fat ones.
And thus this bladder is to be placed upon the limb:
Take the candle of wax or a lubricant, and place it mid-bladder across the shaft which is in the bladder, so that if the flax should be at the bottom of the bladeblade does not burn the patient.
le p that heul; ʒs ; they so is some.
And make an incision as before, and repeat often if necessary.
In the blister treatment for pneumonia, it has no rod nor cover and is only made when full of water, and placed on the limb briefly.
And this is how to do it:
Without exceptions are applied solely to limbs where one cannot place cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas. and in those newly nicked by a knife, like fingers or toenails, and other similar things.
and the quality of its use is that when you find soft tender veins, which are not hardened by disease, take them.
lont thatt par l’mous toug se ben. Et ce suivons. And then cleanse of veins and poultice, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply to the wounds.
And when they are smooth and healed, if it is possible at that place to apply a poultice, then do so, for this is much needed afterward.
If not, raise the limb lightly, and then apply water well, and then squeeze it out;
the step by the same c.
If blood is multiplied, then apply crushed alum or gall nuts, and similar substances, until it stops flowing.
Or place on the wound a half measure of scraped leaves, and let them rest until they adhere to the wound, thus it will now stop.
And if more is needed, then take additional materials.
Mum: the d [1 c. And then place them back, and as soon as they feel their blood, they stiffen.
And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle some powdered alum and ground silex, or ash, so it will clot now.
Here begins the book of fractures.
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and provide restoration from fractures and dislocations.
Learn, dear student, that the foolish may be guided by this treatise, which they have never seen in any ancient books nor read letters about.
and because of this reason the knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones like it.
the bockards tot.
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated at the end, and shown clearly the forms of inflammations that are created, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
Therefore, we must say in this book the essence of words and chapters where the sage places his understanding, and dwells on truth so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that whenever there is a fracture or dislocation or twisting or quassero comes to anyone, it is fitting for you to support the patient's injured side and other, if nothing completely supports them, as with weak bodies, infants, or old people.
If the tension is not too tight or too loose, and if it's cold joint juice, that is to say, cold joints, and blood of birds and deer, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are free from fear of an abscess or discharge of matter in the limb; then return to first aid as the patient is used to.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that promote nourishment and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, barley, lamb's pancreas, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. For the nourishment mentioned contributes to quicker healing of the fracture.
And know that broken bones of the aged and those very worn cannot well heal or fuse according to their nature for limb restoration, nor those also who are too tender, like the bones of small children.
But take care to reset on the broken bone with large tendons that are sturdy and join the limb together, until it is as strong as before; do not perform all of this work at once, and therefore you should nourish with hearty meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures occur in various ways.
The fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of breaking bones. There are fractures that result from an upward force and others by pressure, just as the tip of a pen for writing.
There are fractures that result from an upward force and others by pressure, just as the tip of a pen for writing. And if there is a fracture with a wound, or a break along the entire small split.
s them.
Et il est connu que les fractures d'os se produisent lorsque le lit est tordu et ouvert trop largement, et qu'elle réside près du pressoir de la main.
Et quand il n'y a pas de torsion ni d'appui en touche, et que le malade ne ressent plus une grande douleur, alors qu'il n'y a pas de fracture.
Mais cela peut bien inclure la torsion, la fente, ou une petite fracture. by; butte and; the following an's ; siles mault that.  tad* cumbard; they aretractor; don's the de the ou let cequesteckze con ca; What. If, et sont.
And know that the fracture which goes into alignment, and are the two parts rejoined, they must now be set evenly, as with abscesses if it arises.
And if abscesses arise, leave it for no day until the abscess is soothed. Then make it equal to the movements that you can easily and gently do, and know that the restoration of it is easier than those where there are broken parts; then the binding, as needed afterward.
And if in the bone are broken pieces, they extend to two parts, whether hands or feet, or to your hand if it's small members, or to two tendons, or to one tendon and your hand;
And place the member according to its natural shape, so that when broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset it using all methods until they return to their places and can move as much as possible, and ensure through your crafting there is no injury or pain for the patient.
And properly align well the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
And the patient feels a sensation in the hand if it seems to you that he is not well: dress him properly, and do not bind or press too much, as those who cause abscesses with their work often result in heat and contraction of the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is in pain, gently soothe the patient and do not allow him to move, neither while awake nor asleep, standing or sitting, or by any other means. And ensure that the limb is secure enough so that it feels no pain. When it feels no pain at all or only slightly, one must put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
When it feels no pain at all or only slightly, one must put it in such a position that it feels no pain. and ensure it is kept upright properly so twisting does not occur when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
the t; That:t, so they cannot we's’re assuze at se uter s (I think they should be no longer the patient of the mid.
For there are small limbs like arms and legs and similar: it is proper to wrap them in soft fine linen cloths.
and those that are thick like thighs and legs: it is proper to wrap them in wide sturdy straps, for the wide straps encompass all of the large limb evenly, ensuring there is no unevenness.
and then is strapped with light bandages, three or four turns depending on the limb, and the hand is bound a bit at the entire strap, then goes above the break and is tightened less than the break; from there it moves away slightly the break.
And soften the ligaments a little at a time until you grasp a large part of the joint without damage, then take another ligament and turn it around again towards the broken joint.
Then return to the part without the break and grip it moderately, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first section above.
Then place strips of lin or cloth between the ligaments so that they are all equal, then tie everything together above a binding, and then put on well-made splints below, unless there is an abscess or swelling.
If there is swelling or an abscess, apply soothing poultice for the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for a few days.
Then strain the wound, and be of a strip of fine linen, cut from wood or reed stems, in this manner:
But it is necessary that the strips applied to the wound be slightly thicker and wider than the others.
t. E:s, l' s eco; se sont les are conttain byt; ChOudre le c. To-C (and she should be this t and bob so  is not the ben t.djne.
Then it is strained onto the ends similarly as you did with the first dislocation, then laid upon a bandage quickly, as in the initial dislocation above the break.
More tightly it is applied, the lesser; and it is proper that the bandage be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, and be made of flax.
For if the bandage is too thick, as in works of lads who make their straps from tangled flax cords, and it's a great error, for the strap cannot be evenly spaced if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two finger spaces between each peg.
And if the patient is in pain from the shoulders of their arms after being strained to healthy places, then place poultices of flax or cotton rags so they do not itch.
When the wound has been torn open and the keys are broken, I will now explain the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not necessary to strain all the damaged limbs on the first day. by this c.
And here is the manner of ancient placements to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that clings to mill walls, mix it with abundant egg, making a concoction neither too clear nor too thick, using this as the common method for restoring broken bones in various positions, especially in women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Another method of plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take abareis (abarotum), ladanum, aniseed, asphaltide, gum arabic, and myrrh - .x. Z.; aloes - .v. Z.; alechilengrae - .viij. Z.; make a powder of it, mix with egg white; if the patient's humour is hot, use this plaster as it has good composition and quickly restores broken bones in many people.
Another plaster method for treating twists: take myrrh and gum arabic - .x. Z.; aloes - .viij. Z.; camphor - .v. Z.; bolus Armeniacum - .x. Z., grind well, mix with water or egg white, and administer the patient.
Another method of treating dislocated joints and bones from their places, alleviates the pain arising, and wounds are cut in the bone; fracture: take new linen, and grind it with powder and oil cooked, and place on the affected area. These dressings do not heal but they are good to soothe severe sores, and properly alleviate pains.
Another method of treating bones that heal: take dried leaves of figs and leaves of the earthly pawl, grind them together to make a poultice.
Another method of treating bone fractures and promoting healing: take root of valerian, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour in equal parts; grind them together, soak with wine, and if the limb is swolebed, apply it with wet coriander or water.
Another method of plastering more effective than the first, when an abscess is ready for limb healing. Take roots of valerian, and seed of flax, balm, honeywort, and hyssop, and flowers of violets and chamomile, in equal parts; and grind, and knead with salt water or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras states in his book that one should not apply anything more than a piece of wax and oil to the broken limb for healing, and it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen believes that on the broken limb for healing one should apply dry things a little warm like myrrh and aloe and incense and similar substances, as we have said.
Another way to treat pain and swelling: take mugwort and devil's claw herbs, or feathers of birds, and wormwood, in equal amounts, grind them all together, and make an ointment from the mixture.
Then apply it briefly afterward and be careful that the patient feels no pain or has moved any bone from its place; do not leave it for long periods.
If pain or itching comes to the area, or restlessness or swelling occurs, then quickly remove it and reset, and apply the ointment now; take a light cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and immerse in water, and lift up the affected area until the itch ceases, and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry linen or fresh cloths with rose oil or oil, and bind it to a stool until you are sure of inflammation.
And allow the inflammation of the limb to settle, and if there is bone pain, then continue with a more delicate setting, and use some powdered emollient, but do not bind it as tightly as before; proceed gently until it feels normal.
And if you see that inflammation and redness and pain and swelling are present throughout the bone, and there is need of emollient powder and bandaging, as you did before similarly.
If it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not reset until after 3 days or 4 days or 5 days or 6 days; and never leave it for 20 days, according to what is seen, as long as the dislocator feels pain and approaches the joint above.
Then you should reset it again more than the first time, and he swells his flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that it dries too much for necessity, know that ulcerations cannot come. The patient arises from the heat bath every time you dislocate it, and do this once a day, and wash off some of the dirt.
In this surgery therefore cut the tendons of the limb, and quickly mend what the foolish doctor does, who returns the member wrongly: it is bad, and such surgeries are frightening, and I see no other thing than slowness and working correctly.
Of various ways of fractures Many ways of fractures are, and different shapes, and the causes are distinct.
For it has fractures made by the percussion of a sword, and the bone shatters all the way to the suture which is below the bone, as is done with an axe or wood; and for this reason these types of fractures are called "hachure".
When the sword pierces the bone above, this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two large or small breaks.
And if there is an impacted fracture, crack, or bone chip from a stone fall, or other similar injuries.
And if there is a persistent fracture, which extends just up to the tissue below the bone, or upon it, and this wound may be large or small.
And if there is a wound that has been filled with bone as subtly as with hairs, and it is a small crack, so this fracture is called "capillary".
and if the wound is made or by being struck with a stone, or falling, or similar thing, and it causes bone fragments to protrude outward, and the ends of the bones are open like when glassblowers blow into their furnaces; so within between the stones.
This often occurs with those who have moist bones like children's.
And this occurs in all these ways of fractures, with small pieces being wasted as elements; and I will speak on its place.
And let us know all ways of fractures by the extraction near them, and the examination with tenting, and by the corruptible wound that is upon it.
The resemblance of hair is known by what happens when the bone is discovered and rubbed over it, then there are black cracks.
In the treatment of a fracture, beware if an unfortunate event happens to the patient, and if you see any bad signs such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever with chills, eyes protruding outwardly, and other similar conditions in various states, he cannot cure without doubt.
And if you do not see a hopeless case, and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
When the pain first comes to you, and it is in winter, one must remove the bone before the fourteenth day that can be seen.
And if it is summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh above the bone is not corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
And if the bone fracture reaches to the flesh that covers the brain, then you should cut the fractured part thus: and it is that you grasp the head of the wounded one, and expose above the before in all ways possible, and on the figure of the wound as smoothly as you can.
And if the leakage of blood comes to reveal the bone or an abscess head, use what is necessary and ensure you fill its place with wrung cloths in oil rosé. And let the wound rest until the abscess heads are soothed, and be assured of blood leakage; then begin to remove around the bone through cutting. There are two ways of operation: one way is that you cut at a narrow space in front, which is the form:
Then make another larger incision than the first.
And the second method is that you have various thrusts of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, with points, and made of iron; and in lighter work, do not hit the head.
And if the bone is too hard and tough, it requires that you pierce around it, administer thrusts with needles, not too deep into the skull or on its tip, leaving a margin or circle so that the point does not pass through the bone; and you must have several of these, each coming to the surface of the bone as needed, having needles for all tests (examinations); this is the form of the three methods of needles:
The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place one needle on the bone and turn it with your two hands until you know the bone has been pierced; then move the needle slightly to another spot, and do this throughout, then use scissors for the space in the b
And when you have pierced the bone and drawn it, then it is proper that you use the instrument prepared to cut through the bone with any tool similar to a chisel, but it must be more stable and finer than the other cutting instruments.
And if it remains nothing of the small bones or scales, then treat the wound with bandages and poultices as we have mentioned.
And another method of treatment is what the Galenists say, which is more salty; and it should be applied strongly, as instructed. It is necessary first that you expose a part of the bone where the break moves openly; and once you have uncovered that part, place it under the head of this crescent-shaped incision instrument, which has the following shape.
And do not cut through (the part), and the section has two sides, with the cutting directed towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet on it, so that you chip the entire surface, taking care of the cloth underne.
If it is close to the bone, gently tap (the mallet), because one damages the bone well if not careful, and fears harm.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the cloth, and the bone is cut smoothly above, leaving small pieces, then you must address the roughness again, and remove scales with a subtle razor of which you should have various quantities in order to apply most conveniently in each place according to the treatment and figure of the fracture.
If you have many razors, use coarser ones first, then finer ones, and continue in this manner until it is well done.
In each other haircut and subtle fracture, you must treat it according to its readiness; this is something that cannot be easily replaced for someone who has put their study into this art.
And if the sinew is revealed, it must be that you seize a linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten with oil rose, and place upon the wound. Then take another linen cloth folded in two or three layers, and moisten with wine and oil rose, and place upon the first cloth; and do this gently as you can, so that you do not burden the sinew, then dress over it with another ligature, and do not tighten it more than is needed to touch only the wound.
and leave it so for a day or two until the abscess is calmed down, then remove it, and apply medicines as with lily roots, and wheat flour, and powder of incense, and aristolochia, and similar things; from these make powder, and put upon the wound, and thereafter apply non-biting medicines.
Ensure the wound is neatly closed without leaving any ointment or bowels together, for when bowels come together over the cloth near the brain, they can cause great harm and distress; because when a biting object is placed on it, one becomes inflamed above.
Therefore be cautious, if by chance something comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful and without doubt.
And if it is not the darkness that has come due to the medicine applied, then let the virtue work its effect, and you should take a piece of honeycomb and three parts of rose oil mixed with woolen cloth, and place it on the affected area. Then the treatment of ways to heal as needed, until it is sound.
One says that the two parts above, or one upon the other, are not broken since they are bones; and that which lies beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break but only fold or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must bind your little toe or the nearby one, and make the break align with your index finger toes, and at the sole side by opposite direction, until they regain their natural shape. ; In English:
And if the fracture is above the shoulder blade and cannot bring the arm back to its place, you must align it with a small piece of iron rod.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do it likewise, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can.
; Y Compez ; you say:c'ile m n’s. The original the bo:
When you bind another piece on the other side, if there is a breakage; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the pores of the nerves.
And said restorer that one must grind the tendons with butter and move each day. I do not think it is good, but it should be ground in a mixture of goat's milk and flour powder; then let the tendon settle until the bone has healed and the cartilage hardened.
And never put goose feathers where the tendons are, and if at .i. sheep's skin strap, and holds the breakage, and blows on the sickly weaklings among them; do this that you see fit.
When abscesses occur near the nose while working on them, apply a poultice of cheesecloth or cotton soaked in rose oil, or use a small amount of diapron.
And if abscesses do not appear, apply a plaster using wheat flour, incense powder, and egg white mixture, then place light gauze over it without covering the nose.
And if the nose breaks are small and broken into tiny pieces, extract as much pus as necessary, then cut the wound, and treat with warm substances like honey and wine, and bandages and ointments appropriate for this.
If it does not have any wounds in the eyes, tend to them with bandages and apply compresses of hot plaster until they are healed.
For a dislocation of the jawbone, reset it as follows: hold the head firmly between your hands and gently but steadily guide the jaw back into its correct position.
; do not be.s. I: an boster by theme the lion is to the sebt and asue
It is necessary that if the fracture is in the right part, you place your index finger of the hand into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, put your index finger from the right hand, insert the fracture gently, and adjust it with the other hand afterwards, making them equal.
And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced into two pieces, it is proper that you stabilize by extending those parts until they are even.
And if there are movements of the teeth or dislocation, strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the fractured jaw, and place a double cloth over it; and put over this cloth a large well-made plank, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, tying it below where you can move. Then command the patient to rest and consume light meats.
If you see that the shape changes, reset it on the following day and then put back what is changing; place a poultice over it with fine powder from a mill or wheat flour after you have removed the clot; place a light cloth over the poultice, and if the poultice swells, ensure that the patient's position does not change, let it remain as long as necessary; many times it is healed within three weeks.
If an abscess arises, treat as we have said many times before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no bone fragment remains; gently remove the splinters from that area.
And if the wound is narrow, expand it with fat according to your necessity.
When you have moved all the bones to their places and they do not remain still, thus treat the wound if it is wide, and place over it one or two splints made of covered wood until healed.
To strengthen him The fractures break in many places before the shoulder, and the breaks occur in three ways: one is broken and separated into two, with fragments, and it is easier to restore; or there are breaks with wounds.
This is the fracture when it's without wound, so have two ministers: one anoints the dislocated joint that feels strained; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the fracture in line with your arms such that its form is as required, and there be neither appearance nor imbalance.
And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round rod of cloth or linen, and make it as thick according to your necessity; and push in and release the strain, holding the rod with your hand, so that you set the faster equal as required.
And if you cannot pull the head of the joint forward because it comes out to one side, so that the patient lies on their stomach, and places in front of the shoulder a mid-sized earthenware dish, and puts both ministers under the shoulder, until the bone of the joint is raised.
And then approach the fracture of your legs, and if you find broken pieces, it is necessary to cut into them; remove the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join by any splinting method, use one of the tools you have prepared but place it carefully to avoid injury.
And it appears like a spoon, and is not too sharp, and should be of the appropriate width according to the size of the bone and strength of the hand; and have two points, as you see, with one wider and the other narrower, similar to the direction of the wound made when treating the fracture.
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, if the wound is large or deep enough, or if there's doubt about it being hot, cover the wound with linen and bandages as needed according to its quantity.
When an abscess comes there, then apply a cloth soaked in oil rose-colored and with ease, and place on top.
The wrenching of the bone, when it is feeling sore and achy, is to place an impaste made from powdered molasses and egg yolk on top, add light gauze underneath, and if needed, put a stick alongside. Then take a very wide band of about one palm in width, then place two layers of gauze over the gauze, and the impaste; then take a thin rod of three fingers' breadth by length and wrap it around that bandlet, ensuring the top part of the bandlet is hanging. Position the splint over the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, below the saddlebone, and below the malady vertebrae; and reset each part, and when you see that the dislocation holds in place naturally, and it is clear that the splint does not move above the broken bone, then reward him daily, and when the ligaments are healed, let it remain.
And lay the patient with their back on something, and place a small pillow under the saddlebone to elevate the shoulder; it will relieve the fracture's pain by aligning the shoulder when you tie the arm to the neck, and do not let it dislocate again until xx days.
Then resume the poultice if needed, and restrain it as such, until fully healed; it is most often restored in xxvij days or less for some individuals.
Of shoulder fractures
Sometimes it happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated without being injured, and there should be no force except from contact; if you set it according to the pattern of the breakage, and move it in all ways as possible; then put over the place powder of milled flour with plenty of egg whites, and light gauzes; then put on a wide and subtle tablet, slightly wider than the shoulder, so that from under the tablet no movement is felt anywhere on the shoulder, securely fasten the linen thread as if it were equally cut; and then stretch firmly a large bandage so that the tablet does not move from its place, and observe each ligament daily; and every time it aches, tighten again and adjust the tablecup if necessary; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. And when these numbers are completed, remove this binding, but be cautious, as it is not bone that sets up lightly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes without breaking the skin and heals over, causing pain and inflammation, do as we have said in treating an abscess to alleviate the swelling.
Et quand ou il les apothe is soies; et doule du s’apoint the cautere sui douce a point of heal and ce, doule le croire quidem. Et seur, et l'est, li mour, as itheu de la pire chirure and dore ke les oint les points ise à peignees du sainte the cure doux the ou est:
The fish is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it breaks often on its own. And when it is broken in the middle, it leans towards the backside, causing the patient great pain, weakness, and paralysis, and at times vomiting blood, exposing the joints in the broken bone, and feels very ill.
And the restoration if it is that the patient lies on their back, then put a pillow between the shoulders, and press the shoulder blades together, and gather the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to all possible ways you can, until the bone'cuase of fracture resembles what it should; then place plasters and cotton over the fracture delicately, or of other light material, and wrap in a piece of cloth so that it does not move, and return the bandage to its round shape on the back, and tighten gently, and loosen every hour for breathing, and if it softens, continue to tighten; and if it needs to be untied due to corrosion or itchiness at the site, or pain or an abscess, hurry up, remove it, and cleanse the plasters, and apply in whatever way you can for healing; then reapply the bandage, and tighten until it is well-shaped.
Of rib fractures.
Certainly that the breakage of ribs comes only in large ones after the back and inside the head, and they do not bend easily because they are slick; and he feels well to inquiry at the joints.
And the mending is to set the fracture evenly as it should be. Then place the splint, and use a stirrup if necessary.
And if the rib breakage is leaning inside, the patient feels very great pain and swelling, similar to pleurisy, because there are no muscles; it brings fatigue, vomiting of a large quantity of blood, and it's a serious illness, and the ancients have attributed much care.
And some say it must be administered meats that inflame the stomach to push out an obstruction.
We do not perform anything if non-purulent abscesses are not present, unless they have already occurred. et to come pain and paired the cure of he is to more this ill be it occurs; often lores that a nature, but with great fear as well-e tu or, so therein the vient eyon does not are they may also comes of nus est de in such.
And they say among us that one places cups on the limb to draw out humors, and this seems reasonable enough; however, there is doubt whether the cups attract excesses to the limb due to its weakened state.
And some say that one should cover the wounded limb with hot oil and place pads between the ribs to make them evenly warm, then proceed with treatment for pleurisy, flesh wounds, and medicines.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the ribs piercing the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then one must split the wounded side of the ribcage, and place an instrument under it to support; and hence, you must cut the bone, and draw out slightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound if they are large, and cure with embalms until healed. And if abscesses come, put on cloths soaked in rose oil over the area, and place it there; and treat while the area is as required for an abscess, and keep bandages above the ribcage or where it must be, until healed.
Of the break of the neck
No fracture comes to the bones of the neck, and rarely does it bow; likewise with the spinal column of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, watch carefully if you see their hands become softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and if you prick the fingertips with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that in some cases it is fatal, but if they are moved and feel well when restrained and not, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and the patient will be cured if given care.
laussle; by Ch
If this accident does not occur, it is a lighter matter.
And the cure is to apply warm oil or sheep fat if there is an abscess, on the spine until it is eased; then place it under one of the comforting and drying stones, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until healed. And if any bone is dislocated, cover it with cloth; then reposition the bone and sew the two edges of the wound together if they are large, using an aromatic ointment containing charcoal until healed; and if the shoulder blade is fractured, known as "chiés de la kowe," put your left hand pouch on it, place it equal to your right hand's power, then apply an emollient stone and thorn underneeby, if needed; then bind it tightly, and if there are any bones dislocated, treat them accordingly, realigning the bone and caring for the wound until healed.
Of a break in the bone of the hip joint
Sometimes the bone of the hip joint is broken, and if it happens, there isn't much shortening at its head; it causes longness in declination towards the pelvis, brings pain to that area, deformity, and swelling where it breaks.
And the restoration is to extend your hand over it as long as you are on the breakage; and discern which is broken and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then align that fracture so it becomes naturally shaped.
by the l’s alle; Man la: anud pes Equt na; also: a1tue; and ils et ses la Jil. If they can be rig; When you have put it back in place, then place on a splint, and also place a wooden or metal pin, and strain the break so that it does not move; and elevate the limb from under the ribs until it is level again.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
And if an abscess appears there, do not touch it until the abscess is eased, and then place what we have previously mentioned; and then return to restoration, and strain as needed unless there has been any injury; this is how it should be done.
Of a break of the shoulder
The shoulders are what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder; if it is broken, then it should be restored according to one of the two ways: where you take a piece of fresh bone, in this manner.
And tie the two heads with two ligaments, and place them upwards, then lay the patient on top of it; then pour some blood into the broken bone until it reaches ease, and let there be a bend in the wood halfway, then place under any heavy object or extend it by ministers; then set the screws so that the fracture is equal to his hands together, as long as the fracture returns as it should.
the; with t but more ; and so that cbutbneda or (fos;
And if you see that the extraction is more severe, tighten a ligature below the fracture, and above it, extending each member to its part. And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder blade, one must place a ligature in the middle under the upper arm bone, and another toward the elbow, above the fracture; likewise, if the fracture is toward the elbow, it requires placing a light ligature without strain until the fracture is aligned on both sides equally, then align the fracture as needed, and tighten, unless an abscess occurs.
And if an abscess occurs, do not tighten until after six days, and apply a linen bandage with ease and oil rosemary until the abscess is soothed; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening should be that you place an iron over the fracture, assemble the arm above the shoulder blade, and put your hand on the shoulder or side; then wrap a cloth around it, and tighten above the shoulder blae, and along the arm so that the arm is in its proper position unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
And if you suspect that the fracture does not move, use splints and put a longer and thicker than others, and it's as each piece two weeks; then is healed at the bone more than .i inchaeinsses qui est lesse brisez deux semble en estaints et les semblanz. puis li os sofrai laisse dement au mielent.
If you see the position of the fractures and the tightness, as we have said, in the hour when you return the broken limb, and if you doubt whether the abscess is hot, let it lie bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then check each III days for swelling or pus at the site where movement cannot come because it is too strained. If so, as we have said.
If no such incidents occur, do not dislocate the joint until after III or more days, and have the patient lie on their back with hands over their stomach; and place an evenly made pillow of wool under the shoulder, and check each hour during the day and night that the position of the broken limb does not change, or the ligaments are softened. If so, by the virtue of medicine, give them the food we have previously mentioned, in a manner such that the meat is subtle; and when they begin to eat again, it should be plentebly. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within XL days altogether; then dislocate and administer baths and ointment medicines at the site to straighten. If the tightness is unsightly and swollen, delay in dislocating until after I or II months.
The translation of "Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles" would be:
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile," one small and holding the elbow, the other large and located above the small joint; sometimes the large "fabicle" is broken only, or the small one, or both together.
When the small "foscile" is broken, restoration and healing are easy; but when the large one is broken, it's a bad sanation, more painful than if both were broken together. If only the small "fabicle" is broken, then slight extension is appropriate to set it right.
And if it's the large "fabicle" that is broken, then stronger traction is needed; extend with an instrument and raise the elbow of the hand higher than the other side, and lower the small joint compared to the others, and cross-tie immediately on top, placing another strap higher so the patient does not suffer any strain. Then extend the minor bands towards the area above the hand or a ligament, with one band at the upper part and another below it. Finally, place them evenly according to its best shape.
In case of a break into pieces, place each back in its position; if any are out of joint causing the bone to be disconnected as we have said before.
And in case of a wound from the fracture, discuss it with each individual physician; if they take care.
And in the beginning of the healing process, if abscesses appear, make a poultice with a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; apply the poultangular over the abscesses carefully until they are calmed. Then remove the poultician's paste, and place an emplastrum of powdered molyne with ample water, placing the stitches for the fracture, ensuring it is more robust and slightly wider than others; understand that there must be seven or eight stitches depending on the arrangement: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; pull tighter near the fracture than other areas, and with each passing day, bring them closer together as we have said at the beginning of this chapter. Let the bandages above the fracture be soft and moist, not rough; let the thread used to hold it be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have mentioned. And after several days, look after the limb and ligament again. If any accident occurs on the limb, as with an itch that comes to a limb, you must bathe the limb in warm water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not be strictly resting. And then resume the straining, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone has loosened, and similar things, do as needed.
And if there is no swelling coming to the limb because it is too tightly bound, you must first loosen it slightly; and let it remain thus for several days until the swelling subsides, then proceed with the straining.
And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, let them rest until twenty days or so; then tie their hands behind their neck and make sure both sides are even, and be cautious of movement and digestion, and they sleep on their backs; and understand this fracture is healed in thirty or thirty-five days, or possibly in twenty days, depending on the compositions and temperaments of the substances.
Of a fracture of the hand
One must know that on the back of the hand there are few fractures, and it does not occur but rather frequent bending many times.
And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it must be that the patient crosse kneels, and sits directly before him evenly; then places his hand under the extended thigh, extends the broken bones, and aligns them equally until they are well joined; and applies a plaster and cotton wool, if an abscess does not come, then he puts in a splint according to the amount at the location; and it is wrapped in .i. linen cloth.
by themt ja peull'* a ben the ou Rechin;s cute.
When the fracture is in the forefinger, it is proper to place a rod on top and another underneath at the sole of the foot, so that the hand remains open and straight; then wrap the entire arm with bandages, ensuring the ligament between the bones is tightened.
If the fracture occurs in any of our fingers and it is a bulging fracture, position it evenly as necessary; wrap with the sole of the foot, and if you see fit, place a small straight rod to elevate the fracture without movement; and if the fracture is like those in the index or other fingers, position them evenly, bind with healthy bones that are adjacent; or bind all together in one bandage so they can move uniformly, or place above a rod as I have said. Be cautious during restoration and abscess placement, and treat any bleeding as previously described.
In the case of a broken hip bone: Take care to immobilize it properly, apply a splint or other supportive device as needed, ensure proper alignment for healing, and manage pain and swelling with appropriate treatment methods such as rest, ice, compression, elevation (RICE), medications if necessary, and follow-up medical evaluation.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it can be seen when it twists forward and backward; and its restoration involves placing a leech on the fracture site, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then each healer extends their hands equally over his parts; and this is when the fracture occurs within the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the hip socket, then one leech should be placed toward the hand, and another below the fracture. Likewise, if it's near the knee, then place a leech next to the knee, and extend upward; then put the splint in equal tension with both hands, according to its natural shape, and then apply the bandage, unless an abscess appears.
If there is an abscess present, leave it to heal and then return to your work and treatment; the incision is made in part. It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture. i. a bandage of durable double cloth (2 or 3 layers), and hold in place any excess material, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches near to the root of the knee, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, underne. Then lead the top part of the thread upwards; then turn the leg and the thigh again with the bandage, then place a peg on either side of the fracture, then put another peg along the bone of the leg; then lay a rope between the leg and the thigh for equal tensioning, then begin to tie in the form of iii. twists or iii. turns above the fracture; and as you go further up from the fracture, and with less strain; then return to the two points of the thread that were inserted between the leg and the thigh, and at these three pegs, then come back below to the head of the thread until it is beneath the knee; and if there is no movement from its original position, leave as such, and when nothing else comes or swells.
And if this happens and the fracture occurs again as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, then it must be handled (if possible), and if not, then the area should be cut open, and pulled out; and treated accordingly, as we have said, until it is healed.
At no time is the thigh broken so that pins are inserted as with the shoulder and arm; however, in such a restoration made, it does not at all relieve the patient's pain.
And know that the thigh is restored in one or two days, or less or more, depending on the various constitutions.
From the groove of the knee joint.
by (and:
And the restoration is when one places equal what is out of joint with its parts so that they can be moved as needed; then apply the cast, and if necessary, place a round plaster, and hold it as required, then address all the arrangements we have mentioned for other breaks such as abscesses or similar issues; apply to each accident whatever suits it, until healed.
Of leg fractures
There are two bones in the leg known as "malleoli" and "fibula"; and any fractures that occur there are similar to those of the arm, so is the restoration just like that for the arm, and the procedures are all the same.
And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg on all sides.
And if a delicate bone is broken, turn it forward.
And if a large bone is broken, it causes great pain and you can see the injury well; then turn it backward. Then make an extension, set it evenly, and tie the fractures equally; however, always, if the breakage is ugly, and there are many pieces, that the extension be lesser and lighter; and adjust according to your knowledge.
is notc andtutor in the de p� by f; they oue an them; cars and it's, as much. Polete ; the bentre et + that they are
From the breaking of bones at the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture; however, the bones of the foot do not break and the shins are not affected, nor does any weakness occur in certain conditions.
And if there is a fracture of the foot bones, and you see these bnads protruding from one another, place it so that they are slightly raised off the ground, as if intending to walk; then put your own foot under theirs, where the bones have risen, and press until they return to their original position; then apply a plaster and dressings, placing two small pins through the belly of the foot at .ij. chiés plaints [places], then straighten it as quickly as possible, after which you should wrap with bandages around, and other things that are necessary.
; ír fab.
If any of the bones are broken, then repair them as we have said for the hand's bones; then put a stake to the broken bone according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place beneath the foot the board that I mentioned, and press together immediately; and if there are two or three or more, break each one and set a stake according to its size, wrapped in a single linen cloth, and fasten the board under the foot; so they may align with the abdomen above the foot.
And it is important not to forget other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have discussed; and treat each injury as necessary.
Regarding the breaking of the bone in the wrist
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit on an elevated seat, then tilt towards the lesser back and be held by someone behind; then fill the vagina with cotton, placing as much as one stalk; then have the woman stand up, and slightly lift the buttocks more and more until the cotton comes to the entrance of nature, and brings the bone along with it; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and after urination is complete, let her rest, thus doing so for seven days or fewer: the breakage will be healed, and if you wish, take a sheep bladder, tie a rag at the opening, fill it with water, then blow through the rag until the bladder deflates; nature will restore the breakage. Then fill it again with cotton, leaving it like this for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the man's elbow or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these close breaks should not be hidden from those who apply their study and use this book. For in breakages there lies various conditions for proper restoration: thus you should understand.
And when the li les cil est le sait, as it qui pren que tostide l’est de. Et vous le la dote et ne puis les boute quant il quis vient l’ent, si la ou met les jors ce qn ente la gue, dont fie espleez. And for the li pute the mauve ie.
Of fractures with wounds
It is necessary for those with fractures and wounds, especially if they are large like the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be properly aligned as we have testified with our witnesses.
And if the wound is healed, and there remains a stain of vitriol, unless you have something else, then begin to restore the fracture at that same hour or day, if no abscesses appear.
c, and tot;k; thatchtiq.
And if the bone is broken appearing underneath the skin, it must be gently put back into place with your hands, through slight extension.
And if the extension does not allow you to set it even with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has six or eight prongs and its width depends on the size of the wound; and so it is necessary for the physician that he grasps three or four (prongs), according to what he needs in each bone-breaking cure; and let them be round and somewhat thick, so they do not buckle under pressure on the limb you are working on, and placed with some space before it:
And it is called "palainche," so that the head of the shoulder must be placed on the apparent bone; and it should be done once until it returns, and they should be even against each지게 other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the extensions cannot properly grip the bone well, then you must cut off the top of the bone so that the extensions have a chance to do their work.
And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, with a fitting instrument whether it is cutting or drilling, to your ability; then remove the piece that remains in the jagged and small splinters of the bone.
And when the bone is brought back together and the patient feels great pain afterward, believe that it is not in its natural place. If you manage to put it there, then moisten a piece of cloth with tonic black vinegar, and properly apply it as needed; and do not put anything oily or other substances on the wound so as not to cause decay and spoilage; then administer bandages once the bone is restored, leaving the wound exposed, covering the entire area according to the size of the wain, ensuring that the strain is not placed on it with a break; and many times, this has been done by wise men who have caused harm or death due to corruption at least once; and let the pressure be less harsh and gentler than for other fractures.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you suspect that it may become infected, as we have said, causing pain in the area; then do not place bandages over it but instead wrap around with a stiff cloth; after one to two days of healing at the site, remove what vinegar you applied earlier, and apply a medicinal ointamoisture similar to the tetrapharmacist's.
And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes relaxed and healthy.
And it is important that the limb be fitted with an appropriate splint so that the bow moves slightly.
And if more than one day passes, and it cannot be relaxed but remains bent again, as there are small pieces of bone, then you must dress the wound with gauze and remove all those unwanted pieces that cause pain.
the ; b
From bruises coming over the swelling
They often come after the healing of the swelling, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant thing to see is how the limb's shape changes; and sometimes cannot perform its natural functions.
Therefore take care if the patient is warm: if you administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, and any other similar substances; whether you use none of these or all together, mix them with astringent wine, vinegar, or rosewater; place it in an ointment tube, strain well without letting it separate during the day; then dislocate, and repeat with another until the swelling is gone. Or if applicable, stretch over a piece of plaster precisely made; because the property of the plaster is that it removes all inflammation from the limbs; and when the hardening has occurred like stone, and there's a need to remove it, cut off any excess on top, and treat until healed.
When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains weak and delicate afterward due to many causes: one being because it was tied too tightly, and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many ligatures, preventing proper circulation in the limb; or due to excessive bloodletting; or from making large movements at improper times; or because there is little blood within its body, thus being weak.
And the treatment is to have the patient eat nourishing foods and keep their body supple until blood circulation increases within them; also provide bathing care and give joy and comfort; then apply poultices on the limb, so that they draw significant healing nutrients into it, and frequently change with warm water until proper circulation returns to the limb; and let it regain its natural form.
After healing of the limb becomes twisted
After the limb becomes twisted following its healing, and bones are broken openly, and the shape of the limb is unsightly: however, do not believe those who say that you must break a new limb entirely, and many foolish people have done so in our land; such treatments are blameworthy, leading to great harm, and sometimes death. However, if nodal tissue and twisting are recent, it should be treated with hot water, or soft herbs cooked as meadowsweet leaves, roots, mallow seeds, etc.; and a medicinal poultice is made, like well-prepared diaquilon, taking the muskroot of mallow, mixing it with pig fat or flaxseed oil, making an ointment; or take juicy figs and grind them with hemp seed, along with similar remedies that alleviate swelling.
And never rub the bone knot continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And allow gentle movements of the limb each hour.
And if the twisted and hardened tissues are like stones, they must be removed with iron, up to the bone as needed by carefully using a delicate incisor; then place cotton and focus on treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs, if it must now be returned without delay.
For if one delays, and the head swells, and perhaps when resetting it is difficult to place back in position; therefore, one should not move it at the hour that it is swollen: many times this causes bumps and other pains.
Always, when this occurs, treat the patient with a poultice, then leave it so that the swelling subsides; then warm the member with hot water and oil, then gently massage each part as needed according to what treatment is required at its location.
se pe en the ciles ke la dur:
Of the jawbones
Sometimes the jawbones are slightly dislocated from their usual positions and become a bit soft; or they may be entirely dislocated and hang towards the left side, causing saliva from the mouth that cannot be held in and prevents closing of the mouth, wrapping its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it can result in various positions returning by itself at times.
And if it is complete and well-formed, you must quickly reset it without hesitation or delay.
And in such a manner that the minister dries the patient's head, and places a small mirror picked up from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand must be free to place them evenly. And command the patient to soften their jawbones, and move them in all directions.
And places the mirror so that it is centered, until it returns to its place.
And if the resetting causes pain, especially when both jawbones are together; then apply warm water and oil until they can be gently moved again; do not force them to move as we have said.
When they are equally returned, and the patient's wound heals well with softening sensation, then place a cloth of milled wool in a container made of oil roses and wax, afterwards lightly bind it with some soft ties.
and the patient sleeps on their back, with their head between two pillows, so they do not move left or right, nor strain to turn over, but gently chew meat until the pains are gone, and the jawbones have healed.
and then eat what they desire lightly, without straining to open their mouth while eating or drinking, until the jawbones are fully healed and restored.
If the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not restored to their original positions, fever and other accustomed symptoms may occur, and possibly intestinal perforation, or perhaps they vomit with pure bile.
And when you see this, then know it is peritonitis; and many times the person to whom it happens dies within seven days.
of a gland
The strong ones cannot be dislocated from within the ribcage and below, nor can it be dislocated once in a while without effort, yet they feel it deeply.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then firmly press your palm into the place, and it will return; then apply a plaster and ointment, and bandage.
and the head that is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if not possible, and if it can be dislocated once, then place it back in its place as we have said; then apply a plaster and ointamoinne to rest for the patient until they are healed.
And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is out of its place.
Of the shoulder's dislocation
the. you* (or not too b so that: the they other. Do not;
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor internally for the nerves; and several times it dislocates towards the knee, especially in those who have little flesh, as in them it slips hastily; in those with sufficient flesh, it moves lightly, and returns easily.
And sometimes this occurs in certain individuals with swelling or bruising of the shoulder due to an abscess, and they believe it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must examine it thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that when dislocation occurs towards the axle, there is a distinction between the affected and healthy shoulder, and you will find their differences manifest. And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axle where the top of the shoulder is located, just as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring their hand to its nose or move in any way.
And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden but can be clearly seen at the top.
And this manner of dislocation is solely to be repositioned when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the method is for the minister to lift the hand of the sick person upwards, then place stools under their seat and gently elevate the joint back to its original position; then the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards before setting them down again, and in a short time they will be healed.
And if it does not heal as we have said in days after, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and they shall be treated with soothing and softening agents such as an infusion of althea, fenugreek, and mellilotus seeds in water, and thus tended to.
Then gently support the patient on their back, and place a cloth of equal thickness underneath them, not too soft nor too hard, then put the edge of their heel onto the cloth, and carefully lift the head from the dislocated shoulder.
and other ministers anoint the patient's head so that it does not move forward; watch as the shoulder returns immediately now, and if you see after this manner:
and that you have present a man who is taller than the patient; stand to their right side, and place the shoulder beneath the dislocated shoulder of the patient, and lift it upward so that the patient's body hangs in the air. And other ministers pull the patient's hand downward toward the abdomen. If the patient is too light, do not weigh them with anything heavy; and the dislocation now returns.
And the resetting is done in another way: and it's that you insert a long stick into the ground so that the shoulder returns as if it were attached to a pivot point, neither too thick nor too narrow. Then it should be placed under the patient's shoulder, but that they have soft cloth over them, and the shoulder is lying on its long axis; then stretch out their hand to the other side properly, and the joint will return quickly to its place.
And if it does not want to return for all these reasons that we have said, then perform this treatment: take a tinder of two arm lengths and four palms wide, with the head receding into entering in front from under the saddle, according to this form:
Then wrap the head with soft cloth so that it does not touch the patient, then place under the saddle of the shoulder. Extend your arms above the length and tie the shoulder to the length, placing the arm at the top hand, then put one arm over a wide shelf bar, with hands hanging downwards, leaving the body suspended on the other side: the joint will be held in place now.
And when it is done in any way possible, then place under the saddle an equal thread of wool and put the poultice prepared with powdered molasses, along with incense and frankincense all over the shoulder and around, then stretch below the saddle promptly, twist the bandage on top of the poultice, and wrap it around his neck, with hands hanging thus.
It is necessary that he moves little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal sooner; and then move more after 5 or 6 days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is well-healed.
And if the joint is strongly out of place due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary that you administer three fires as prescribed in the text or according to previous surgical practices with fire.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 6 days, and the joint does not hold, nor can lift any arm upward, then understand that either the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or extended or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Dislocations towards the thigh and limbs or behind are made by impact, with hand extension, and another lever is applied; care for it until it becomes healthy again.
And if after healing comes weakness in the limb and tremors of movement, so often does the patient suffer painfully until the tremors are alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
From the displacement of the shoulder blade
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by bends and rebounds; if it has been dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, then the dislocation cannot be reduced, as it can be clearly seen and felt; and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated elbow with its flesh, if it is clearly visible. Because the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset them as soon as abscesses come to the surface, for if abscesses emerge, the repositioning would be grievous; and sometimes they cannot be reset at all, especially when they are in the back; this kind of dislocation is worse than others, and causes greater pain, and may even result in death.
When restoration is as such that it can be brought back, extend its hand to your two hands; and spread its arms wide, and the fingers following the course around, above and below, place the joint with its fingers together or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back while doubling its hand to its own hand and at the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, then strong extension is applied; and that of two ministers extend the arm, and hold each side by a minister so it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from both sides, then wrap with a long and wide piece of cloth.
And when the limb joins with its joint again, if you grease it with any oil to soften the joint, then reset the joint properly until it is restored.
And when it is in place, if you apply dry dust with egg yolk, then reset firmly and support the arm against a pillow on either side, leaving it for several days, then release.
And if the joint is firm in its place, release the sling, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, restart with dusting and binding, leaving it for several days until it is securely fixed; then release it.
If it feels intense pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until relieved; or put a fat sheep's bladder over the joint, leave for one day and night, then remove, and allow bathing again. And if it sweats, rub the joint well afterward, then put the bladder back on, and allow bathing again; do this twice or thrice until healed; if you see any moist chaffed straw, heat with butter, apply warmly, and it will return to its proper state.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand occurs, and its repositioning is easy compared to other joints; it must be promptly returned to its place within the same hour as it becomes dislocated, lest it swell or an abscess develop quickly.
And the repositioning is such that you place the injured hand on a table, extend your fingers, and make sure they are even; then place your palm over the joint's surface, applying pressure until it returns.
Likewise, you must ensure that it is properly in place; then make the injured hand lie on a table for extension and repositioning. When the dislocation is in the back of the hand, instruct the patient to place their hand's back on a table, and have someone else position their hand over the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
If not, apply a soothing compress on abscesses and allow them to begin healing again.
And if it cannot be tolerated, and you are unable to put it back into place after several days, the misaligned joint persists.
Et ne nuist niant au malaide fût que tant que les mains sont amoilliees, et ne peuvent étrangement aucune chose à tout : alors sais-tu que les nerfs sont coupés, ou l'artère ; si n’y a autre moyen fût que d’étrangler par cautérisation près de la casse, et peut-être n’en vaudra autre chose.
And when the hands are at rest, place them on the splint as we have said, then strain and leave it for 5 days, then release and let be so.
And if it cannot move well, and there is any weakness, so rub with warm water, and massage until it feels smooth.
From dislocations of the fingers of the hand
Never are dislocated the fingers of the hand to either side, never at the back or front of the palm.
Then they are set, and the dislocation is done to the joints until it heals, then support the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it was dislocated.
Allow it to remain for two days, and then place it evenly as on that day; then bind it closely, as we have said, daily removing the bandage, causing movement, and reapplying the bandage at night; do this often, until it is straightened.
Do the same for any other dislocations, if it is in the abdomen of the hand, do so as you did before, until it heals; do likewise when it is displaced on another side.
The relaxation of the spinal column of the back.
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several dislocations, there is no remedy, as it quickly kills the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations flow with great force without control, and they cannot be held, causing many times members to become weakened, or either of the hips or one arm or both.
And many times the spine becomes dislocated in four parts; that which moves towards the rear is called "gilboses".
The treatment is such that if you find it infected from childhood, there may be no cure or healing at all.
And those that come from a fall or blows or similar things are treated with ancient methods through great words, which do not have much benefit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention and formed extracts in various ways.
leckcome.
And also those that come directly to two ribs, which cannot be treated otherwise than the one properly coming to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched on his back in one place equal, with straps under him so he does not bend;
Then the patient's other pieces and are it has them;
And two ministers hold the ligaments, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two tendons.
And be well closed, the tendon as we have said, and the physician places his palms on the spine formatively until it returns.
And if it does not return from this treatment, take a stick three arms long, and tied at the middle, and let the patient lie on one side, then place the middle of the stick under the ribs; And place the points of the pins on the opposite end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you see this, make the turn with your hand that turns towards the palm.
And you shall insert two pins at the head of the bad arm on one side and towards the other two points, with between each pin, above and below, a span of space long.
And in each pin there should be a peg, or the wheel turns correctly, and they are firmly planted in the ground so that they do not move; and between any two pins there should be one turning pin on which the ties turn, and it has in these two turning points two small pins of a span long to turn the wheel.
And then tie the ligaments that are among the bones at the neck towards the head, and the other ligament towards the fingers at the other end, and each minister turns their torso to all of the ligament, and the master aligns the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is evenly aligned, place a drying poultice with abundant egg white, then the plasters, and then the splint of a tablet three ounces long, to protect the area of the hollowness and the healthy part of the spine; then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and use gentle nourishment for the patient until they are well.
and if at the end of their recovery, administer soothing and calming medicines with the splint that we have said above; and never once administer a slice of leeches.
At times the appearance comes in the lower back vertebrae, and it is thought to be dislocation; however, because the bone opens, one should not have any presumption: perhaps it would bring about death.
For hip dislocations
Sections that assert hip and shoulder joints are only from dislocations, not like other joints; the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, front and back; more inner than others, less forward and backward.
And the knowledge of his dislocation's depth is such that when joining the injured leg with the healthy one, it appears longer and more open to the bad joint than the good, and the patient cannot double the bad knee by fire. And it is the lump that is near an inflamed abscess hot, because the shoulder blade comes close.
And the sign of those who come in later, such accidents are opposite to these before.
When it occurs in one who is before you, the sign is that they straighten their leg as completed; however, do not double bend the knee causing pain, and if you want them to walk, they cannot do so, retaining urine, swelling of the limb increases, and when walking, passes over the heel.
When it occurs in one who is behind you, the sign is that they cannot expand their knee or double bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, swelling is softened, and the head of the thigh reaches up to below the ribs.
The return of this kind of dislocation is that one should not assume the dislocation was present initially and it persists according to its nature, there is no treatment; and it must not be assumed that it has healed.
In those cases where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocating, quickly return the joint to its place, push it back in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will come back on its own without needing further treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must summon a strong assistant and firmly hold the leg with two hands or with one bandage above the knee joint. and other assistants extend their hands towards the thigh in such a way that they place their hands below its knees, then they tighten it with a weak bandage around the hip; and others pull the head with the bandage.
And they are extended upward and downward all at once, as long as the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and hangs suspended.
This method of extension is common in four similar cases, and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, it is good.
If not, you must provide care for this resemblance. When the dislocation is at the shoulder blade, it is necessary to support the patient on their healthy side, then place a strap above the hip joint, and the length that is below the arm pit, then extend the strap upward toward the arm pit and forward;
Then call in other assistants to grasp their arms and embrace the large misplaced hip bone firmly, extending it forward as much as possible; now it will return to its place immediately; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it as we have described, then it is necessary to bind the two feet of the injured person together with a strong soft ligament above both heels and knees, ensuring that the affected leg is extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let them be hung from a pole above the head and two arms' length off the ground; then instruct one minister to embrace the top of the hip bone firmly, while another assists by hanging with the patient as they also firmly grasp the hip, because the joint will quickly return.
When the dislocation is on the underside, so place the bandage as in those with shin splints, and stretch one ligament above the affected leg properly, and at the foot likewise.
Then place two heating plasters, one on the head and one on another part of the body, then insert a tisoin between the hips near the affected limb below. And place wet cloths around the limb so it does not move, then extend both ministers towards him, and the master aligns his hand with the dislocation evenly.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place on a table and press as we have described in the treatment of hernias, and lay the patient with their sick side supported.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must be stretched with the sick leg quickly, and as I have said; place their pain over the sick side, then press with the other hand, and extend down towards the groin.
And if the dislocation is behind, it should not be stretched downwards or raised from the ground, but rather as though the haunch was dislocated backwards as we have said in lying on both heels; Et so it on his face, and the ligament is stretched as we have said before, and one must put ointment on the joint to the bone.
And the face or he it shall extend its legs are equal and they lie next to them and apply ointment after having been applied put adhesive, and let there be covered with a bandage.
Rest for three or four days, then reset it, and place the splint on top; if you see that they are even, strain as before, and leave it for three days; then reset it, and let the limb move gently until it is comforted.
Of shoulder dislocation
The joint can be dislocated in three ways: into the bone and out of it, behind, and not forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if it does not return to the hip, declare that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, then place your back to his face and put your foot under his.
Then take his knee in your hands and draw it between your thumbs, then bend the two sides of the kneecap properly. Other assistants extend his foot until the knee joint returns to its place, and the sign is that he can lightly move his leg at the hip.
And apply the bandage over it, and lift the leg to the hip, keeping them together firmly for about iii or iv days, then release it; do not allow the patient to move until the limb is comfortably set.
And if the limb is not properly aligned, it must be carefully and firmly straightened as we have described in the treatment of the hip, until it is sound.
on the ankle's dislocation
The heel is sometimes moved but never completely set right or wrong; within and without.
And the signs are such that the ankle is swollen, and it tries before reaching the part from which it has dislocated.
The resets are light, and you should gently extend them to your hands when they have dried sufficiently.
oint esainment:
Then lay the foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice with your left. Extend it upwards, and elegantly lift the foot high.
And do this twice as we have said, extending and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, resume the procedure, for it will return.
And if it cannot return thusly, lay the patient on their back on the ground and make a firm passage between his thighs in the earth, and bind cloth around, so that it does not shake the patient.
Then dye the minister's thigh, and another minister extends his foot with a cord, so that it is tied above the calf of the foot. Then each minister is extended equally, and the bandage should be placed between the thighs of the patient to hold them in place while being stretched.
Then set the miraculous object equally with your hands for the dislocation, and another minister dyes the healthy leg from below, and the dislocated part will return swiftly.
And when it reaches this point, place the plaster and dressing over it, strain properly, bind the bandage to the leg, and watch for the nerves behind the ankle so that the ties are not too tight.
Then let it be for two or three days, and if the ties need loosening, re-strain them; then remove on the fourth day or quarter of it, and allow the patient to walk with crutches for four days. And if it goes beyond that term, do not be assured that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess appears there, it is necessary to soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it becomes healthy again.
From the dislocation of both arms and legs
When both arms or legs are dislocated, they must be stretched out with care, and it is a light task.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, you must make the patient sit on that spot or on a table straight up, and put your foot under those joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
and so the unt lesse de n’e t splops ou.
Of wounds and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and you see the need to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
If you are not well-practiced in the healing arts and have not done it for a long time, and if you are not compasscuos and merciful and slow to act; do not be rash:
lame the bo they arents so as and bon. When you see hope, reset the limb to its place now, so that wounds may heal there;
And when the limb is reset, administer soothing substances to alleviate wounds, and treat the wound as needed with dried ointments.
And if there is a dislocation and broken bones or fragments of bone, do as we have said in simple illnesses.
And guard against entering into fear, according to what I have said, for it is beneficial for you as per your Creator's will, and for the well-beeledness of your arms and body. Amen.
