Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the tail of the science of medicine, and together with its fulfillment through explanations and statements. And in my vision I came to you with this treatise, which is part of the whole work on surgery, namely "chirurgy".
And because the work of hands is well-established in our region and it concerns everything, thus science becomes poor and dwindles, and there's no need for you to delay on these writings that ancient books have described by hand. And from this comes the error and pride, understanding is closed off, and knowledge becomes distant.
Or it seems to me that I will revive this treatise together with the organization of its course according to the method of explanation and statement, and together I will present the forms of instruments for cautery and other tools from the work with the accompaniment of declaration and preparation, as is proper in this craft.
And because there are no good masters of hands to be found in our time, the art of medicine is distorted. And it is required that one who meddles in the science of anatomy as Gaius says, so long as he knows the justness of bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations from each other, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and joints and number of limbs, and their dismantling and resting positions, and their outlets.
And this is why Hippocrates said that without the art of hands we do a lot less, and with the work it is little.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that who is not knowledgeable about things previously mentioned, then he avoids making errors and causing harm to others; therefore I have often had many more among those who meddle with this science and abandon it for practical experiments.
For I see a foolish person who cuts - I mean incision of abscess or groin area of a woman and cleaves her arteries; because then so much blood flowed that the woman died in her hands.
And I see another person who betrays a large wound in a man of age; they took out with the wound a piece of the bladder, and he died thereafter within three years.
And I had already been called for to treat it, and I saw the position of the dislocated limb and its size; so if it did not improve, then he would die from that injury.
And there is another physician who took care of the duke of our land, who had a broken leg, and with the break he had an open wound; and the physicians' ignorance forbade them to put the fracture on the wound at the edges by great pressure, and they did not let any salt at the wound in any way, and commanded him that he would not remove it anymore; and so he waited until the leg was completely healed and the knee and joint came back to ruin.
I was called upon by him, and hurried to come undo his leg; when I saw that it was done, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But every path to his corruption had already been confirmed or a part of him was affected, and he could not be cured; and the corruption continued through the limb as long as the limbs were completely lost.
And there is another physician who collapsed his abscess inflamed by the malice of his lordship.
For a boil, when it is filled with black bile and does not require the touch of iron if it's no longer in its full state to allow for complete removal of what has corrupted, as indicated by historical medical practices where excessive intervention or forceful treatment was sometimes considered counterproductive.
And for this reason, examining the children, you must know that work with hands is divided into two main categories: it means that the head has danger in various positions; and I will show in each chapter of this book where there is fear and danger related to body positioning.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the ignorant physician does not speak ill of your work.
If you take up arms against them, and begin your dangerous treatments firmly and quickly, and use the best method so that through God's grace you are saved and blessed; and leave to those suffering incurable diseases any hope for salvation; and strike down their arrogance because of which they doubt your abilities. And thus be it so that you can come from this world into the next one with glory.
Galien warned in no way to treat illnesses with improper methods for fear that you might call the ignorant physician.
I have divided this text into two parts.
The first chapter is about fire and wet cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and forms of traction, and instruments for caustic treatment, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups, and wounds, and arrow extractions, and similar things; and it is ordered with the forms of traction and animal handling.
The third chapter is about repositioning dislocations and twisting injuries, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and with forms of traction and animal handling.
So it is our memory from the past that requires me to indicate the quality of help and the harm of each condition.
I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtle science and secret remedy; and from this they spoke to many people, and agreed on it; and please them few words, because I fear lengthiness.
I say that fire cautery helps for all conditions in which there is matter, because among these conditions are hot condition with matter and dry condition with matter.
In the case of hot and dry conditions together with matter, no one decided on it; and those said that fire cautery is great help, while others said otherwise: that fire cautery is only good for diseases caused by heat and moisture.
Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat-related illnesses caused by fire or moisture; and those who said the opposite said that cautery makes great help for warm and dry diseases that come from people' Written in English as requested When you compare the patient's body with its heat and humidity to the condition of fire, you cause bruising.
And I agree to this statement. Because I have found it never through experiments.
And in all cases, there is no harm from this method except for those who have tried it and know the master of cauteries well, and the diversity of home conditions, as well as the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the duration of treatment; we do not fear other conditions, especially cold and moist diseases. And all those who were more important agreed on it.
And know, my son, that fire cautery together with fire is a secret of treatments, and more mercy than burning medical caustic.
Because heat is simple and does not harm anything but the member that is burned, and affects few other parts.
Medicines that come from other parts and make it appear in the affected member’s illness; and by chance occur toteis of laissons.
The fire cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are born.
And this I found by experiment and through the length of service that I have put into it, and is situated on the verdant land of things; and for that reason, because of the length of my words, I apologize to you for not revealing the secret which has been returned or set aflame, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher says in demonstration, regarding how it expels diseases from the body. Receive this in your thoughts.
And you know, my friend, that they agree on how long the cauteries should be performed and to what extent.
And I say that cautery is applicable in all cases, because the sufferings relieved by the help of cautery are due to necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a longer time before greater malignities manifest themselves on the limb.
And you never think as the foolish fellow does; because to a disease healed by cautery there is no relapse; and they say it this way: But it's not so that they believe, for cauteries are not merely medicine that changes the constitution, and dries up humors which cause pain, but rather acts as urgent treatment of value due to the virtue of their work and their authority.
And there is an issue that the disease grows no more according to the constitution and nature of the malady and its virtue; and they accumulate superfluities in it through acquisition of meats and similar things, provided cauterization takes place quickly or with little moisture and excess, like cauteries for pain from dense areas, and similar things do not bring back pain as often. But this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand that cauterization is called the 'backbone of medicine,' and it's a matter to observe; but they don't believe that cauterization holds any value after other forms of treatment, as their understanding is misguided, for we apply various treatments in no disease and none of them are worth it, so we apply cautery, and it is valuable. But cauterization does indeed have the backbone of medicine, not according to the understandings of some wise men.
The ancient said that the instrumental cauterization of gold is more effective than iron, and they said it not for the quality of gold or the highness of its substance; and they said that the teeth of the cautery do not cause ruin, but this isn't seen as I have tested, and I found in some people. And instrumental cauterization is more effective than iron, just as they said.
A chascun:age de forter malgreveintures, etent ilgeant lignit ence en cautere.
:erlements:erleves. ousurecause the erupeut:ent. Let'ing. Thisesun :ertjacorre. Ipsum. Whatretearlore:esque, andire, unlockere.usera. Hereupon it:es:
Or you command this chapter concerning the head justly placed, because it is easier to find.
Double olive oil cautery
These cauterizations are due to moisture and cold applied under the head, and in them there have been two causes: one caused by a disease called "soda," and another from various humors that descend upon both heads, ears, and for many dreams and pain of density and throat pain, most especially with all diseases coming from cold so as paralysis and stroke and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the maladies are purged by medicine solvent, removing the head .iij. or .iiij., depending on what the virtue and ease and custom allow the patient to suffer; and then make over again the head of the malady.
And then it shall fit between your hands, and put your hands on the piece of flesh; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his nail between its .ij. fingers; and if blood comes from the incision, warm up the olive oil cautery which is called "olivaire," for thus it is formed:
And you put on the mark with ink, and draw your hand downward and extract it little by little turning; then lightly touch your hand again, and reward the wound if you see the bone .i. small piece; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take a few threads of silk, and place them in soft and moist cotton, and put on the mark again, and leave for three years; afterwards cover with fat wax; and let it warm until the fracture heals, so long as it is cured.
And the ancients said that as more time passes over the wound, it purges more; and for this reason they help mice.
And none of these said that you must let the cautery rest until a part of the bone is set free, and then resume this which belongs to the bone, and care for it.
llatragreisn's. What itel,sesin thewinter oflater: Cureticle. Commentaire ​rexine develle. A:seu. Forget teguron:thems:les chrissoe de.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be good in all aspects, fires that no man has ever had reason for fear; and I think I should leave them; because the shoulder joint is weakened by continuous fluid solutions, as we see in other members too; and myself when the patient's shoulder is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salve and medicated for me, and with this use I am now helping.
The chief pain from an inguinal hernia.
If in the whole pain it comes chronically and lasts long, then it should use its weak shoulders with cochineal pills and "cochies" (a term possibly referring to certain medicinal treatments), and draining of chief and oils and plasters; and if they subject them to the cautery we have mentioned before, and it is not valuable.
Be careful that the patient's shoulder with a strong nature should not be too cold; but rather the cautery on that area a little bit as we have mentioned above.
After performing cauterization on each bone of the area just under the os (bone), as we have said before; and do an additional cautery or "vasselz" (possibly referring to a type of surgical tool); and it is in this way that you raise your hand so that you do not see the bone: the weak patient feels too much greater pain with this cauterization than with others, and I will speak about them elsewhere; and it must be that the cauteries on the horns are more subtle than those used for most of the chief'e sore, and it is its form.
This line appears to be a standalone statement referring to two types or instances of cauterization associated with pain. In a medical text from that period, this would likely describe different approaches or techniques for treating chronic pain through cauterization of the area around the joint responsible for such discomfort. When in part of the chief pain there comes sudden soreness, and it is extended to the oil (perhaps implying that the condition spreads), and the shoulder joint is cleansed with universal medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned regarding disease division—but none of this profits; yet if you do cauterization according to two methods [of treatment], namely medicine water and iron:
: the following. Ifingue of thek :entire ait enjacin the:laterrexentailla, le codexere, buttergall italex25 (meaningth century: Thejourrexent:sac:
After the treatment until he is sound; and if you see that there are any of these incendiary remedies I have written about or treated regarding incendiary remedies.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery so that its shape resembles this:
And is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a clover or it has little curvature, and in shape appears only slightly; and he places on the painful spot with your hand and restore most of it lightly, until the edge of the spear's point is bare; and let your hand that the artery does not burn, but moves further away, and abundance of blood flows.
After placing cotton on the thread and putting it on the painful spot for three years; then I put moistened wool there, and he treats this ulcer with incense until it is sound; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellate," at all points of the point, and do not cover the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
from migraine
When curing migraines as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and do not benefit from it at all, because he says that in medicine the iron before called "cultellate" must be heated until white; and then place a line half a dozen fingers long on the dry spot with your hand once, and strap so as to not puncture the artery, but let it remain moveless on the bone; and warn me of my jaw that becomes mute when touched, and the nerves do not show discomfort or spasm in a patient, and tell me how to allow sanguineous drainage from the artery after it is drained, or bloodletting has taken place; and leave this subject for me; but I will tell you how the bone becomes tender when the artery is punctured, and show you on these pages where in the book it is written that it appears.
And if you see that this iron does not affect the disease at all and the patient suffers, then cauterize it in the same way as we have said before, and treat the wound so long until it is sound; and if you observe it, administer the iron which we have mentioned or the one used for extracting an artery, with two knives; and these irons are better than those and more effective.
of pain in the ears from a cold source
When the pain in the ear comes from frost and coldness, and he has applied remedies that we have said in this division of diseases, and these pains do not cease, then heat this iron cauterizer which is called "pins", as it appears:
nent,le, and theu:eslustre, leu theoreiallumeinish. enge de laire itis (13rdiscene : œrise. Forencontre istoi entorne withoutiure ofssejurine aillet:arai queen morce:ent.
Of the torture of the mouth
The torture which must be treated with cautery is not those caused by fire but only those that move from mucus, just as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform any cauterizations for symptoms that come from emitting phlegm or sneezing.
When you treat this kind of mucus-related torture which involves earwax and nasal discharge, along with gargling, it does not hold true that you should perform three cauterizations on the patient: one at the root of the ear, another a little behind the temple, and a third in the alignment between the two jaws; place the cautery where the area is open, and apply the cautery to the top of the ear above some part of the head, and another near the temples as well, so that the discharge stops entirely; this is the form for the cautery:
And is the kind of cautery we have described before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after curing the wound as I've previously mentioned, provided it remains healthy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have previously discussed, it does not benefit the patient at all, and the ailing do not develop a fever, but rather fourteen cauterizations: twelve on the two horns of the head above the forehead, one in between them; one takes out the head, and another is called "vassels" as we have previously described, and caution must be given to the area underneath the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
Of cautery by fire
This malady requires giving the patient long years and medicines that moisten the brain; afterwards, they examine the chief of the sick person thoroughly, and place upon his occiput a pinch of nutmeg written in books or treatises on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: as I have said before.
If it is sound after this treatment, good; and if not, then they apply three cauteries to the chief of the patient by pulling down towards the collarbone and leaving a space between each one (one for every caustic), with heavy doses given (.i. de gross); and they treat as others do when you add it, and if the sick person suffers, then apply another caustic in the middle; and if necessary, two other on the ears, and treat until he is sound again; and these are called "olivares," as I have previously mentioned.
Of cold caustic applied to the head (leader of the patient) It is required that the leader of the sick person be moistened with years and everything we have said before; after examining the chief of the sick man, then he applies caustic to the head and on each horn (horns), one behind and three on the spine of the collarbone; if you know more about it, and the leader is damp and the sick person suffers, and the disease is severe, then he applies three cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let him hold his hand up as long as possible until the keel grows arrows, and treat until he is sound again, and this is called "olivares," which we have already mentioned.
Of epilepsy (a neurological disorder characterized by recurrent seizures)
The epileptics should not use forceful caustic on those who are phlegmatic (having a temperament characterized by an excess of phlegm in the body), and it is necessary first to moisten the brain with years and other cures that we have previously mentioned, in the division when the malady is large and severe.
surement:esce lexinumbreatere. Whatene, andercises aitsecre enjurse:noselet:caracter. Forstir demejorent (withoutalic:rime se; ilion :iantire.t.
If the patient is young, then he makes a subtle cauterization in this manner:
By the cause of melancholy are surpluses or corrupted moistures and heavy humidity, which is why we have mentioned to those who suffer paralysis the strong cauterization with small scissors as we've said before.
And if by the cause of melancholy are declining surpluses and the patient's corrupted wetness related to melancholy, then he should drink something so that his brain is purified accordingly, as it appears in front of the division.
After the leader of the patient has been treated; after making .i. tortile of lin well made, like .i. circle, and he places it on the head; and the malady's parts are crossed and securely held in all places; afterwards, the linen is covered with burlap from ancient bears; and the fire applied immediately so that he can endure it, and after evacuating the circle around the chief, let the patient cool down; then make this treatment once a week, alternating with other suitable governments until they are healthy.
Or if you see the patient being cauterized by making more punctures throughout the entire cautery, this method of cauterization greatly softens the brain; and then put it in a cotton ball with waxed linen and lard of wildcat.
of the eyes When the first signs appear as I have mentioned in the division, and then begins to drink something purifying the head, and he is kept away from all moistures, and his sweat or bath is done several times without food.
After he commands to revive his head by applying heat and performing .ij. cauterizations on the .ij. temples where signs of dislocation are present in either one location or another; then throughout all the cautery, every vein and artery that pass through the heart area is targeted, following along its length within the temple's breadth, and he instructs to manage bleeding, if you see too much blood coming out, then lance it with consideration for what you have.
And I will teach you how to manage the bleeding during artery extraction and incision; and it is never done by applying heat or cutting inside the .ij. bones behind.
The two corners of the eyes
When the tears of the eyes are old and usual and situated by veins, or near arteries as seen on the face's surface; and one can see that it is due to cold fleshy rheumatism, then he applies the same cauterization I mentioned at the beginning of lowering the eyes: .i. cauterizes the head, and .ij. cauterizations on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauterizations or puncturing inside the .ij. bones; and if there is a need for more, then he performs another small puncture above the spot.
The two corners of the tears
When the medicines are taken as we have mentioned in our division, it does not help at all, instead he drinks a purifying substance for the malady .ij. nuiscoches; after that, he revives the head and performs one or multiple cauterizations of the olive type on the temples' crosses called "claviles"; and makes several small cauterizations in the area near the veins (called 'ij.' indicating an unspecified number); and warns about not congesting the artery. And it is the shape of the cauterization that is called "clavicle": This reference could be describing the physical characteristics or method, which might relate to some procedure involving an area, presumably.
d'lords.sufectifreviener:give causeurfierguevaindecomprectiforentecrecheletheuren, le nomprecthecelle.ingible, Theves an
And if you see in two cauteries on the two shoulders also long hairs like the shoulder joints are; and do not let go of them unless the third part of the skin has been burned, as I have said before.
The following text is a complex Old French medical document from the late medieval period, specifically related to ophthalmology and eye surgery techniques: There has never been an occasion where the hairs of the eyes were turned into spots and caught oil, and they hold it, and then we make cauterizations according to II ways; that is to know whether by fire or by hot medicine.
Or the cautery by fire commands that the patient let the hairs (corneal endothelium) grow long and even; and if they are touched at their base, it is restrained so they do not move until they come into being.
When they come into being and become even, then the malady is placed on your soul; afterwards a figure is drawn on the skin wherein it shall be as if by fire's smoke, and whether it begins with the sign near the hairs; then cotton moistened in oil and musk is laid upon the eye, and the cautery of this kind takes its form:
After the cauterization of the figure you have drawn so little and so often, let it burn at that place; and the signs of health from your past are that you see the skin retracting, and the hairs raised to the point where the oil is; then lift your hand there and leave for now .iij. years, and put moistened cotton in burdock until it soothes the bone; afterward the treatment of ointment as long as healed.
And afterward the hairs come back and the paper is mollified, if as you have begun; and the hairs are deformed again, so that they do not cauterize until the paper be raised to its natural state, and don't touch the oil.
The fiery cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a paper shape from the leaf of myrtle; take soap flakes and hot oil, one each .Z., and grind them together well; apply it hastily so that it does not cool, then sprinkle it on top of the shaped paper as if it were covered with myrtle leaves, and place the hairs thereon; if the illness is confined to just one oil, treat it accordingly in the same manner, and if both are involved also; place cotton soaked in warm vinegar underneeuf; and the patient's shoulder be in your care and show its position on your medicine, and press a little bit every time the ill person feels sensation from the medicine, as they would feel if it were done with fire. If you have done this for a long time, then the medicine has taken its due course. And when the sensation from the medicine has passed, lift up the hair again, and if you see the paper lifted as though it had been raised by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, that is well done. If not, put more medicine on the hair or if the medicine has not yet worked, until your interventions are equal, and your fingers in order; then place a cotton pad moistened with burdock root therein as long as the arsenic ointment, also called "dyafenis," and others, keeps the wound clean, until it is healed.
And if you know well that you must carry out your work with great care so it does not reject the medicine on the hairs. If the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, then resume the medicine on those loosened by the paper, as you have done before; afterwards cure until healed; and this is the form of myrtle leaf:
And you know that the size of the men is diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this they are your constraints; and do not repeat the right path for those whose study of this art it is.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery.
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not yield results, it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
Command the patient to place his head in your care; and tie up his head between your hands so that it does not move or protest its chief; afterwards apply cotton moistened with olive oil or olive juice on the oil, then heat the cautery as if it were half a feather of an arrowhead; now whether the patient' Written in Old French.
After pressing the fistula it becomes overtightened, and I extract the pus and drainage; if it is closed, then do the work and pull out the bowel; after that place the hot cautery firmly on the affected area under the oil where your hand will not make a mistake; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil and corrupt it.
If you come at the beginning of the cautery on the bone, it would be better. But if not, then restart the cautery once more, and in case you have experience, let it for 2 years; afterwards place cotton moistened with wax, and treat the drying ointment until it is healed, for 40 days or so, until the bone becomes exposed, and apply corrosive medicine to it as much as needed. Accordingly, when that comes up in his case, report it to your master.
And there was a way to perform a cautery on an abscess that none of the ancients had mentioned. When dealing with an abscess, first cleanse its opening; afterwards place under the small incision a thin needle made from bone in the shape of that area'ited. And we do about the amount of .з. (a unit of measurement), and hold the bone needle firmly in your hand so that it does not move; to prevent the molten fat from coming into contact with its oil, it is necessary to place moistened cotton on a clean white cloth or woolen napkin over it; this process restores the proper function of the abscess and promotes healthy healing.
And if the abscess is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, that's good. But if not, it must be administered to the nerve, and bring back the fistula to its original position according to what should be done in your own case.
cracks in the lips There have been many instances of cracks in the lips that are called "peeling," and particularly in the lips of children.
When you heal these cracks as we have described in the sections, and this treatment does not bring benefits, then apply a small round-tipped culture-type needle to it according to this shape:
And place the hot needle immediately in those cracks while they are still open, and after that treat the affected area with wax until it is healed.
from the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes from the root of the throat or in the uvula, or at the roots of the teeth, and it becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have described in the divisions, but with no benefit: then it must be that you use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after removing the abscess drainage, hold your hand where the bone is exposed, and make it so, and do this once or .ij. times as we have said in treatments, until it has healed; and if it is treated thus, it's good; and if it's not, then you must disclose the bone corrupt, according to what vould you find in your master.

When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicine which does not work then place the chief of the sick person on your health; after shaving the cautery that will come here afterwards in a similar manner as you put a cane on the tooth; and pour hot water into the cautery immediately, and hold your hand tightly so that the patient feels heat coming from the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after filling the mouth with salty water, and let the teeth bleed for an hour and a half.
And in the same way the one which was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are retained tightly, and the moistened spirits corrupted.
of the pain in teeth.
When the pain in teeth comes from colder temperatures or slight cooling, or it's cold and damp weather; when medicine does not work then one must use cautery according to the manner: and cautery of tallow and cautery of fire.
The tallow cautery is such that you prepare a spoonful of wax or lead; after applying cotton and wrapping it over the tip of a tent, and molding moistened wax therein, and immediately place it on the sore tooth hastily and hold tightly so that the tooth becomes cool again; and then do this often until its virtue wears off at the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool is frayed, and put a spoonful thereof made of tallow on the next tooth, and place it upon one iron heated so much that the fat melts at the crown of the second tooth.
: theca: apresque (biet. Theurs.
When the scrophulae are of fluid and cold moisture, not responding to medicines, after which the shape appears, and they have four openings for the fluids to exit from another part; and apply cautery on the apotome once, or twice as needed until it moves at the tip of the apotome; if the apotome is small, then apply cautery according to the size of the apotome, and leave it for three years; afterward place cotton soaked in woolen cloth until healing occurs. And afterwards treat the skin with ointments and bandages as long as it remains sound.
When the moistures conquer the channels of the mouth, and especially when it comes from cold constitution, then it must be cleansed first with solvent medicines; afterward apply fire to the root of the throat, but ensure you do not come back up the throat, nor scald but a little. Afterward, apply another cautery at the union between the neck and the head of the spine, which we call "clavicle," as we have described previously; and treat the wound accordingly until it is healed.
The term 'touste' likely refers to an old French word for a type of tumor or swelling (possibly related to lumps or bumps on the skin, which could be linked to various medical conditions). However, without more context from the original text, providing an accurate modern English translation is challenging. The term may also require interpretation based on its usage in Old French texts during that period of medicine and surgery. All diseases of the mouth are of cold moisture, and the disease has no fever or chills, and it is an ancient disease, so you make two cauterizations on the gums in those areas previously mentioned; and another cautery at the site between the breasts; and treat the cauterization according to the shape described previously. The term 'clavile' here refers again to a type of cautery, specifically one used for treating certain conditions as per the descriptions provided in older medical texts or practices.
And if you see, apply fire to all the points that are called "points" of this kind; the shape is like this in the disease of the ears; and let the points be here at XXX or slightly deeper; after curing the wound according to what has been said before, and treat with cauterization at three stabs following this form:
And because the cauterization is lighter for that reason, making it three times to the cubit (which in medieval terms would refer to approximately 18 inches or about 45 centimeters). However, it's essential to note this measurement can vary based on individual interpretations of Old French texts. The reference to a "cubit" is an approximation for modern understanding and may not directly align with actual measurements used at the time.
The mention of 'dislocation of the shoulder joint' in this context refers to a medical condition where the bones of the arm (the humerus) become misaligned from their normal position within the socket of the shoulder blade, often due to trauma or injury. In medieval medicine, dislocations would be managed through practices like cauterization and manual manipulation, reflecting the limited surgical options available at the time. When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it must be reset of ce nouvel. de la bone, etreche:especs d’or ounces, a pointure desorce smais, mesures pour adore tene avant leu alafortune esmeans aspeech encompote thees cafeinonfait ofte prefecture. After being dislocated at the back and side of his shoulders; after loosening the kneecap which is inside the tendon with both hands, if it gets displaced there, then pull out the cautery that has two holes where the shape indicates it.
And cauterize the kneecap as much as it penetrates on the side, and come back with all four heated needles; because that is how cautery is made using one needle with three holes, for this reason the figures of cauterization are these three needles; and they correspond to the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the form of the needle with three holes.
And it has never been touched upon the first nerve so that there are seven needles.
After placing the cautery on it with wire; after letting the patient rest, and not allowing his limbs to be moved for as long a time as he is well supported.
And if it is dislocated above, this hardly happens, but a cautery is made on the thick heated needle or with many needles pulling; because the joint is referred to the bone marrow and the soft tissue of the shoulder is healthy.
The two-needle cautery for bleeding.
The ancients said that one must perform bleeding cauteries with the roots of aristologos, and in this manner: take a root of aristologos as long as you can find, whether it be dry or fat and also long; smear it with olive oil, and roast it in fire, and make one needle between the shoulder blade and the collarbone, and two small ones just below the neck where there is hair on both sides of the face; and two more cauteries behind the fifth rib, slightly descending towards the back side; and one needle inside the hip joint, another above it; and between the outer hips a few other similar cauteries in sequence, all being between each other as they are further apart; and do not press your hand but openly apply them as if smelling flowers.
And none of the ancients said that any man used a heated iron cautery resembling a barber's razor, and they heat it and put it between the shoulders, as long as it goes to the abscess; and his pain leaps up like what we have mentioned in the abdomen. But in this treatment there is fear or the maladies are now dead, or an inflammation occurs that cannot be cured.
from the mouse.
When you treat the disease of this mouse because we have said in our discussions about curing methods, it does not benefit at all, for indeed they apply three good ways to cauterize that everyone knows.
Of which there is one way in that you do two, or three, according to the length of the mouse, and according to the shape of the caustic fluid we have said before; and do not put your hand anywhere on all the caustic, but often on its backside as well.
Furthermore exists another method of cauterization in which one applies a caustic that has two points as we have demonstrated concerning the dislocation of the shoulder; and it is vital to position the point where the mouse lies, or the direction from which its pain originates, typically towards the patient's left side, adjusting the height of the application according to the curvature of the spine, and the caustic itself must be sized in accordance with the curve of the shoulder.
Subsequently ignite the two points of caustic to such an extent that their application is perceived on the opposite side, and then thrust the instrument, thereby having a total of three applications; if you notice, it should be applied to all three points. After this procedure, when it has caused purulence over a long duration, which justifies the other treatments mentioned earlier.
From inflammation (Here is an additional point that may be relevant in a medical text discussing various outcomes or sequelae following certain procedures, such as cauterization.)
Cauterization is not without its merits, for it serves in cases of acute "asclytes" (acute conditions or sudden flare-ups). When you treat according to the methods we have outlined in our divisions on cautery and your treatment does not yield results, indeed it requires that you perform three more cauterizations both around inflammation, one each upon the stomach, liver, mouse (possibly referring to an organ or pathological process), and two beneath the spine along the vertebrae, and one towards the end of the backside near the tail; and ensure that the caustic is applied closely to the painful area on the spine.
After allowing the caustic to remain in place for a prolonged period, and not ceasing the treatment of the painful area afterward; recovery would be expected, and together with all three applications, aid from God will ensue.
The form of the caustic for the abdomen is such as we have previously shown; and that which applied to the backside, according to what it has been demonstrated herein.
of the swelling of joints When the joints are swollen due to watering (edema), and they are covered with yellowish discoloration, it is necessary that you perform incision on the back of the hand between the ring finger and little finger; and move your hand gently while using the cautery. And do not pierce too deeply, so as not to create new watering spots, and apply the cauterization according to this shape:
After performing incision on both legs at the tip of the chisel, and applying the cautery along one side of the thigh in front and the other behind it, inside the leg, let the cauterizations continue long enough to allow healing; after treating the remaining treatments that we have mentioned.
from the medication
When the solution for the stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as it weakens both the retentive and digestive virtues of the stomach and intestines, which cannot be cured by any treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, perform .i. great incision on the stomach according to what he has mentioned before, or incision on the stomach with a small cautery that circulates around .iiij. fine incisions beneath one another, and .ij. incisions on the thighs.
And if you see moisture accumulating and the patient suffering, then perform .i. incision on the groin, and .ij. small incisions on each side of the intestine, and .ij. little incisions near the large stomach, because the cure is beneficial when it has good aid.
of the treatment for hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are foundations or multiple occurrences, and they are old and cold, moist, and decayed humors, they are treated as we have mentioned in divisions, and it does not profit from performing: .iij. incision on the spine of the back, located far behind the anatomical landmark, with small incisions that move forward and backward like a triangle, and .i. small incision beneath the abdomen. .iiij. more such incisions.
And if you think the stomach is cool, and the meat does not cook properly, and see swelling of the face, therefore apply .i. large incision on the stomach as we have said before, and .i. other incision on the liver, and .iiij. such incisions along all the clavicle; let the cauterization last long enough until it heals completely. Afterward perform treatment of the skin so that it is healthy again.
of charnosity which is named "thell"
If you copes althelul leu.
Of wounds ill treated
As the patient cannot endure cutting or incision, we will tell them herein, if a sickness comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
If a fistula does not come into existence and is old, with dirtiness and moisture-corroded, you must prove to understand all the tent's depth, and place the cautery as if it were a razor, according to how much of the tents has entered the fistula. Then resume the cautery until those corrupted parts are removed, once, twice, or three times, depending on the amount needed; and warn you of the nerves involved, and large veins. If the fistula leads to the bladder and intestines, then protect from these things in their entirety, thinking that it is not inherently dangerous; after curing until it has healed completely, and if its lining is stone-like, you will know that the tract is entirely healed. And if the matter within is bone, but corroded bones, then do as we have described herein.
of kidney disease When the pain of frost comes as rain and heavy winds, and does not take from a woman, it must be that you perform cautery on one side of the rains and another with a clavicle hook that we have previously mentioned; and if in such environment our cauterizations were three in line, then there will be greater assistance.
of the bladder lions çoinfyrejerme a meinthe thisantoiquarryngesignentifarreture parisocanausare:savoirs, untilsemblance:nde  mentions:this creintrefaire:se greintheuisseurs  13ireviseuengentiqince frompeffectaungeur ifccur
from a stone When the marrow is cold and moist, it does not allow conception, and the flowers are decayed and their ends come late; and when they appear, there is great pain: therefore it must be done with three incisions around the belly, as we have said about the cautery for the bladder, and three incisions on the back; and a clavicle incision, as we have mentioned. (This translation assumes "marrix" refers to a condition or procedure related to marrow rather than bone anatomy since direct reference is absent.)
From the hiccough (Note: The original text may not explicitly mention 'hiccough', but based on medical context involving incisions and treatments, this translation attempts to link it with a related condition that might be treated similarly. However, without more specific information from Old French text, linking "de la hainche" directly is speculative.)
When the viscous mucus descends into the hiccough sphincter, causing it to lose its position, and this signifies that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and they find the limb's divided part lying within the hiccough sphincter area, which must be cauterized on the hiccough sphincter at two incisions resembling a circle around it, and before the sphincter as it turns, so that the hiccough is spread throughout the circle; and such incisions should be made like those used for cauterizing the stomach. (This translation assumes "de la hainche" was related to symptoms or treatments concerning hiccoughs and sphincters, based on common medical terminology.)
And if these incisions are not present, then make three large incisions like the olive grove's stakes, and perform them as you do with all other knives; and treat it until it is healed. (This translation uses "olive grove" metaphorically to describe a pattern of incisions that might resemble rows or patterns found in an olive orchard.)
Of the pain from the hiccough (Note: The original text, while discussing treatment methods and symptoms relating to the hiccough sphincter, does not directly mention "pain from the hiccough." This translation is constructed around general concepts of discomfort associated with hiccoughs.) When the pain comes from the hiccough sphincter, and it is due to cold and moisture, and this malady must be cured as we have said in its division, and the curing does not work well; since the disease is ancient: therefore it must be purged of the large humors with foul-smelling tablets or other similar bland tablets. (This translation connects various symptoms like pain to treatments for old diseases, as described in historical medical texts, possibly reflecting a broader understanding of hiccoughs and related conditions.)
After making the incisions; and the manner of these incisions is according to two methods: namely, taking together medicines in hot form, and flaming incision according to various techniques, which are as follows: for you must make three triangular incisions in this shape on the hiccough sphincter, making it deep and broad, and leave a distance of about two spans between each incision, and be that incision similar to an olive stake; never made an incision within the middle of the hiccough sphincter for this purpose, according to this shape: (This translation attempts to elaborate on specific surgical techniques used in historical times related to treating conditions affecting the hiccough sphincter, including triangular incisions and the use of heat therapy.)
And if you see the cautioner to the hiccough sphincter (Note: "d'epei dea. It is used cautery of a hundred yearn que leu ence enven. Si vous descuite quittant la haincs.
And this is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hunchback and does not reach either to the thigh or to the leg; and if it comes to the thigh and the leg, they perform .ij. cauterizations there where the malady says that the pain is held, and .i. cauterization above the ankle, and .iiij. does on the left side a little bit; and either cuticular cautery or arthritic flare up wherever it feels the pain, so they cauterize there where it feels the pain .iij. points or .iiij. with the instrument called "points".
And if the skill is there, then they do more; and when the pain lies on either side of the genitals towards the thigh, they perform a cuticular or circular cauterization very well in all their cauterizations so that the instrument does not burn too much nerves and large arteries, and to avoid causing further harm or contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen others who cauterized the joint above the knee where the pain is felt, and they allowed it until the leg was fully released, and even the ankle as well, and examined and ruptured all the pieces of bone; afterwards, after a stomach solution which led to death.
And if the pain is in .ij. parts together, perform cauterization on one and on the other according to this manner. // The surgeenas said during the cauterization of the hunchback, that's how it should be done; make .i. such iron piece and either as thick as a nun's knuckle or a little less, and place it between teeth-like grooves or just like one over the other with an approximate distance equal to the length of a finger; and arrange the grooves across .ij. parts, and make them like teeth, and have .i. handful of iron well made; and this is the form:
And heat it until all are red and gently felt, and then place it on the malady's hunchback bone, and turn it over the healthy side; the cauterist will perform .i. cauteries again and leave for .iij. years; and make an emplastrum of fat, and let the wound heal over a length of ten feet; afterward, when the treatment with oil has been done as long as it is sound.
Albucasim said that we use little of this cauterization for the patient's sake, and if we see only a few who undergo it; but overall, these are good cauteries, which can be endured by him, and when they begin to alleviate the pain.
from the pain of two legs
When the pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or too great evacuation, or by spreading cold material, there is no comparison for these signs except cautions with ice-cold material being introduced into the patient's vein.
It is necessary that the bad wounds be void of fetid pills or similar things, made upon his back where the pain holds three lines of indentation, and in each line four or more times according to its virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and it should be done with the "pincers" according to the type called so, and if you see, make 3 or 4 strikes or more depending on this form:
This disease often comes upon little children, and the signs of its onset are that they become constricted above where it clings, and fear; and you turn in the spine's backbone and observe the appearance coming from other vertebrae.
When you see it and have treated it, if you cauterize with the "cellery" according to this form. (Note: "Cellery" does not correspond to known historical medical terms; assuming a transcription error or archaic term in use here.)
If the "pincers" purge each part of the vertebrae equally. And if you see, if it is cauterized along the spine with the striking pincers making 2 or 3 lines and keeping them close together; after this treatment let it heal according to what we have said, and beware that you do not administer pincers in a slimy state containing nerve matter.
of the joint pain
When the pain of joints is due to moisture that spreads on each limb' Cook it up; when the pain comes in pieces, they call it "podagre" properly, and when it is cold-caused, medicines cannot cure it, so it must be treated with cauteries in parts: make much of the scything pincers upon the joint, and let them use the hafted pincer according to this form:
And if there is need that you strike the point on the face of the joint, making cautery with the pointed pincer called "point". And when pains descend to the genitals and other joints, often such things happen; make cautery in each joint part, upon all the hafted pincer according to this form: And if you have practiced more, do it so. But hold your hand not further than it is necessary for curing the pain.
:
Of the route of surgery
When the route comes in anger, and the belly descends as if newly born, it is essential that when you see him curing, he does not vomit throughout the day; and let him lie on his back between your hands, commanding him to turn his wrists so they are repaited, and rasp them at your discretion, and from there begin the surgery on the bone of the pommel, and with a sign that is similar to half of a circle above the heart; then heat the cautery as it has this shape:
As long as it's white and smooth-feeling. Then scrape the belly areas back to their original shape; he instructs his hand so it doesn't return arrows; works well on both thighs of the patient, placing a cussion and sergeant there, along with another similar instrument beneath the thighs that will also heat the hands; then apply the cautery in this manner across your whole palm, holding up your right and left arm until you fix the bone, but if it breaks on the first attempt, continue heating it as long as necessary for the bone's repair. Be subtle when using the cautery so the belly doesn't burst or cause other harm to the patient due to the malaise.
And remember that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing. It is required that the cauteries used for children be applied gently according to their size, and those for larger individuals also proportionally; after three years of treating it with burnt wax until it becomes ossified; afterwards treat other ointments as long as healed, keeping in mind that his malaise lasts for forty days on his back so that the fracture is well set. It is required that their movements be restrained continuously to prevent the belly from protruding when they get up and go into rooms.
And after forty years when he wishes to get up, he should be fitted with a well-made bandage and wear it for another forty days; then have a good rest, avoiding too much work, excessive drinking of alcohol, overeating, and high vocal strain; when he has done this lesson fully, then is he completely healed. I will mention this after the treatment with cautery in his master's practice. From the route for the abdomen
lou cas, et il ysans les enlalice la ceteau semblant paroles devening theuccle meafeiij century (100's leu in itjacme toastretran.victims aesle: ices as-lyssentures, ceaceus:ecellos.xil:age. Itorinjus. il. Thecaisse.commen:sacre.
But first mark the point of entry and make an incision above the route, and another one deeper, and with your hand encircle all around the caustic needle. But the first cauteries are thinner and more wrinkled.
Of ancient pain in no limb. When the pain comes in no limb, or from falling or injuring oneself, and this pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment is of no value, then it must be cautioned with the pincers called "poins," and the cautery should correspond to the length of the member and its weaknesses and virtues and position of twists and pain. If the first cautery heals well, that's good; but since custom dictates that it must change for the limb near at hand, you must perform the cauteries until the patient no longer feels pain.
This term does not directly translate to an English phrase with a clear meaning within the context of medieval medicine or general discourse. However, if we were to attempt a broad interpretation based on available knowledge of Old French and medical practices:
The wounds are helped by the caustic needle at no time, and especially the disease that comes from putrefaction of blood and melancholy. Can you see it cauterizing the malady in its beginning? And if it is treated as we have said in this division, and does not stray or linger, so that you doubt whether corruption will affect the whole body, then make two caustic needles: one at the top of the wound, and the other towards the temple's end; and four on the horns, and five behind the skull. And let your hand be long enough until the cautery bends to the bone, and so that the scars come out as far from it as possible for the vapors of gross humors to escape from them; and cauterize on the muscle according to its position in front.
If the craftsmanship is dispersed everywhere, and it manifests clearly, for you must use of these caustic needles from those that we have said previously or chiefly, one on the knife near the spine, and two on the backbone, and twenty-five on the knees, and a great underneath, and some on each joint; and twenty-two on the hips, and another.
geanimexan cribe:decanseurifirefy, presentura. hevelangeableccellexentiuphitechevesque ifère andocherre,a.projetifreve:lance (southeloignes. Atroletifre
of growth
Sprouting comes from no member and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it's not healthy, however, they apply cautery to the limb according to its size and proportions; and a little bit penetrates into the fleshy part of the joint where there is nerve supply. And never done cauterization on hand and arm and back, at the exit of the nerve causing the member to be deformed, and thus it's bone growth; and everything else doesn't happen without knowing about members and moving nerves in the body.
Of alabasters
The disease that affects "alabaster" is old, and the treatment of medicine doesn't do anything, so they cauterize it with a little bit of cautery according to the size of the joint; as long as the white stone turns into bone and its color changes, then treat it repeatedly with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from colon and goose's blood for each part; mix them all together, and bind it tightly so that it remains healthy.
The cauterization of a sore
When the sore appears at its beginning and you see to arrest it, if you cauterize with a cautery that seems like .i. circle; thus healing is said in every case; and what I don't seem right about is that they also apply cautery around the sore's center, as we have stated many times before; however, I fear it may become ulcerated and rotten, and I never wanted to do it again; but rather the proper thing is to cauterize inside with a cautery called "circular," if you agree with what we have said about many cauteries.
Of growth that cannot die
Someone may have a disease called "adubelati," and it delays death or from its excess of bones (which is to mean excessive growth, orbits him. And you observe: forlittle cauterization around the whole; afterward. Because she will delay her.
liste,entifiquele andifreveucongevel sections ​1213nciteuxellet
And place your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" so long as the cautery has cut through the vein, and let such cautions be done to the sickle that the ill's pain is dispelled in any part manner like the course of diarrhea. Afterward, until it is completely healed.
The treatment with fire by iron
Another way of disease is called "corrodens," which is essentially a joint inflammation, as it affects the limbs just like fire burns dry leaves. If you see this illness that can be treated with cautery together with fire, then hold the cauldrons very small and large according to what is necessary for the joint or the disease; after treating all of them until the corruption has been removed, nothing remains of the disease except everything that was rotten should be osteit. And then let it remain for three years, and on these burned cauldrons apply oil so that the eviction of fire is complete, and all the rot infected areas heal; after this treatment with ointments generated from charcoal. If you see in three years that there are no signs of recovery, that's good; but if it doesn't recover, then again caution should be applied to those limbs that have not been treated. This joint inflammation was never cured by medical oil with fire at the site of cautery; however, all treatment with fire is much more helpful, and I have already said about the healing process for the division: take as much as you know how.
Infections that come from stones
Often it happens that stones produce a disease called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a great thing that bleeds the stone; the treatment for this disease can be in two ways. That is fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is as if you are using a pin with such a spike made of good iron, and it should have just enough thickness to allow the nail to penetrate through all parts, and that it has subtle margins; after setting it on top of the nail, turn your hand around the nail until it begins to bend at the point where the nail is inserted; then let it rest for 2 years while it starts bleeding. Then make a poultice of known herbs ground with rope, and leave it on the stone all night, and the nails will be pulled out of its roots. Afterward heal the joint with charcoal ointment applied until it has been completely cured.
lou theor:er. Aprementent the malad. other iten laisse.
The treatment for trembling
If any shivers from coldness of the body, or quartan fever, or other similar ailments, it must be that you perform .iiij. (23) cauterizations or .iv. (4) on the spine's dorsal side, .i. (1) between each vertebra; and .i. (1) on the ribs, and .i. (1) on the stomach with the olive cautery; thus it will leave the body shivering from the coldness of the illness.
This phrase translates to "pustules appearing" in English. In a medical context from the 12th-13th centuries, it might refer to the emergence or formation of blister-like lesions on the skin associated with various diseases and conditions prevalent at that time.
None of the time have baths appeared by external causes, or pustules, which arise from large corrupt materials. When they appear, it must be that on every chief of the pustule: one fine point made of fir wood, if it is fixed with fire, or root of alismama long or a lenticular cautery; and nevertheless once cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and cannot grow further, but are dismantled from the superfluous matter by which they arise, and become sound; yet it must be that this is done after the evacuation of blood.
This phrase translates to "when the artery is blocked" in English. In a medical context from this period, it would refer to an obstruction or constriction of blood vessels that impedes normal blood flow, which could lead to various health complications and required interventions based on the understanding and practices available at that time. Many times there occurs large hemorrhages from the blocked artery to the wound that appears at a pressure point, or incising the abscess, or on cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is very unfortunate when one becomes entrapped (estenchier).
And in all such cases when it happens to you, if at once put your index finger on the wound vein, and strain much so that the flow of blood is stopped within your finger, and there's no more coming out; then apply several olive cauteries both small and large until everything turns red; then take .i., or great or little according to the nature and location of the wound and vein, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep pressing the cautery there so that the blood flow is stopped in the vein.
And if it jumps up above your finger when you have extinguished the olive cauteries on that vein, and you take immediately .i. other of those cauteries which are applied to fire.
sou it'onex. Andre. (13rd century. Andante: theire. And thenace.
Who will dress the ligament tightly or put things underneath, or other similar things, if it does not provide much benefit.
And if it happens that there is none and he has no more or medicine, then he should put his index finger on the wound in vein as we have said before, and stretch it up above the wound and the vein; and let him not move it, but keep the moisture cold as much as possible so that it does not become frozen and swollen until necessary to perform cauteries and medicines.
We have said in the first chapter that such a disease requires fire or medicine-laden cauterization, and various preparations and causes and stimulants and forms of cautery; and I have introduced this main section here with an outline for easier navigation on what we will develop further.
And so I begin, it is essential for you to know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cauterizations, which requires much greater precaution.
For in the work of this chapter, there are often instances of blood evacuation when opening a vein, and making an incision above the abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where doubt and fear arise, leading to many deaths.
And I advise you not to embark on recklessness. As many people come in treatments from such individuals who suffered so greatly with their illness that they died quickly due to the harsh treatment and pride of their sickness, which is something we should be wary of. And of these who have their sensibility and say: "Wait, I am safe"; and the disease is stubborn. You do not need to agree with those who come to you with this manner; rather put more caution in your honor than your care for others, use prudence instead of compulsion when dealing with what you are certain about, and take advice from those whose good reputation we should have; this will help in the healing of such diseases that bring fame, glory, and remembrance.
Truly, our Lord teaches us good judgment and honesty, and if you seek the holy inspiration of His hand in this matter, Amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter to be divided into sections according to the subject matter that is before us, as it has been arranged in these chapters for easier understanding and accessibility of what we need to know more quickly.
The first main section filled with water (likely a metaprompt error). Given there's no context or content provided after 'dou chief', it cannot be translated meaningfully without further information. Assuming this was meant to refer to the "first chapter" in a medical text, here is an attempt at translation:
This disease often comes from the childbearing time, and when he tightens too much the chief of the child; and sometimes it is caused by some reason.
And I have never seen this disease but in children, and all those I have seen were weakened by it; and for that reason, I seem to think that the work is less thorough in its treatment.
And I saw a child whose joints were swollen with water, and the head was so tight that it couldn't hold up even for one day; they thought it to be moisture, and this moisture is gathered above the bone on top of the sinew between the skin and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, then you should make a small incision in the head so big as two people doing it together, and this continues until the moisture passes, and at that point there will be a triangular-shaped cavity:
If the moisture is more swollen and the incision larger, then make two incisions shaped like a cross according to this form:
And if the moisture is inside the bone, and you see the commissures of each part overlapping at every side, and the water gushes out when you press it with your hand near it, which is not surprising; it requires that you make three incisions between these commissures:
And after making the incision, remove the moisture entirely; then close up the incisions with bandages and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it for five days; then let it heal by dressings and ointments, and allow the head to return to its original position gradually, and feed the patient roasted meat from a small amount of moisture until the limb is strengthened and healthy again.
And another method of making an incision is to look for the larger opening in the abscess and the accumulated water within it, because it has never been done before from any direction: whether towards the right or left side.
Then open the abscess and drain the accumulated water, according to what you are able to do; and be careful not to cut an artery; and look for signs of bleeding from a fracture or dislocation so that the patient's condition improves along with the evacuation of moisture.
about relief
When there comes to any case where the disease is called "catarrh" and affects both eyes or the throat, and the illness is chronic, and medicine does not help at all, then curing with bloodletting seems to be effective by cutting into two arteries.
However you must see that the patient's head returns to its original position; afterward, rub his neck with a coarse cloth until the arteries show up, then flex the patient's neck on one cloth piece by piece near their ears, and observe if they are swollen on both sides; then mark those parts, then make two deep incisions around them. Then press down hard enough so that you can see bone through his skull above the incision until it heals up from his head:
And if you see the arteries above the cavale, and ceulx de leu les oint:
lumeurgeu lifelastrelethevellions (deventrangrensechanssissekare:naglessevellet iflass  a l'appartanime france heure to letifte le citésaincelentiferevieeruntifereveux.
And if the artery does not open to touching, it is necessary that you measure the distance of II points; then enlarge and make it into bone; and as much blood must be injected so is XII parts, and perhaps a little more or less. According to what the patients can bear, and the swelling of the artery, look at the wound: if it remains on the bone not covered by sore, then close the wound and bandage, and care for ointment until it is healed.
Emigration
When ancient emigration comes along with a headache and fever due to moisture of tears and heat in the temples and other similar things, and it is treated by various medical techniques and none of this benefits him if we extract arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the way of extracting them is that it makes the hairs on his temples grow back and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well with its beating, and few blood are taken compared to any man who is too cold; and if it recovers, he removes the cloth from the patient's neck, then rubs the skin of no rough cloth, and raises the wound with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take a spatula with this shape:
Then scrape the skin gently as long as you keep to the artery, then pull it up with pincers, and remove well-laid cloths on each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn the tip of the lancet there, then coat that piece according to the number of points. For if it is not coated, it will jump out completely in every way.
And draw the blood of XX parts, just II; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you lay it in II loops of a strong silk thread, so as to prevent moisture from coming before healing the wound, and drain the excessive fluid between those two points during this hour; then cut the cauterized cavity with the cautery needle into the bone until the hairs are cut off; and it is the next operation, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm constitution.
And the cautery is to help finish the mists: for that reason, it provides great aid to them. nacuteint. When the patient is too weak, he holds less heat. And the swords must have a significant gap between them, and when you insert the rods into their places, and hold the fiery iron over them until they bend to the bone, and pierce the vein in these spaces; and separate the dislocations from this cautery throughout its entire process; and it is the form of this cautery:
of tears
When the tears falling from the veins underlie the test of strong heat applied to them prevent any medical relief and make the malady's skin darken, and one sees how his face moves like that of fright; and they are held tightly and moist so that the hair on the papers become scorched, and the papers are scraped by the heat of tears, which is necessary for this cure.
And they called it "cure contuse," and you perform on the patient with this malady the hairs or front that he has, then you make two fissures or flat areas exactly according to the length of his forehead; and one of these incisions is as deep into the head below its surface, just above nape, and the other goes beyond the ribs over the papers, and avoid cutting arteries located between the ribs, and keep your hand away from further manipulation of the mandible teeth, ensuring each incision is the length of three joins.
from the incision just below to the second incision; and scrape all the keratin (likely referring to skin tissue or scab) that is between these two fissures up until it reaches the bone beneath, then make another cleaning of this first incision just down to the other second one, and then pull out this sponge.
If you put the instrument which is called "cultellus," and it's finely split into two parts, one in theft: And place the sharp end towards the knife's edge, and the pointed end towards the bone, and let all the hairs fall down from the head until the opening is complete; then continue cutting in that same place as the incision continues, and then proceed further in the previous hole; and extract the gelatinous mass evenly, and press the wound for the blood taken out; then put a bandage of clean cotton in each hole separately, and lay moistened cloths over it with oil and honey and hay, and make sure that abscesses don't heal inside; and after three days release the ligament, and treat it with cold water basilicon ointment and other wound cures until it is well-healed.
Release the hairs.
When no one has a strong cold ague habitually, and you see the hairs tightly held and small, and weakening vision, and burned papers; and their scalps hurt, and at the top they endure painful aches, and the maladies are severe, and therefore it is known that these things and this catarrh do not come from many veins but from various causes, and the medicine prescribed by him must be this.
And you command the patient to raise his forehead, and make a large incision next it; about one point in size. Then begin the incision from the temple's left side to the right, until reaching the bone; avoid touching the temples that move towards eating; and when the bone is exposed, wash out all the blood with an absorbent sponge, then place clean linen between the two sides of the incision, and cover it with fine linen; then lay moistened cloths over it with wine and oil, and prevent any internal healing; when the bone is osteoporotic, you must rub the bone until it begins to sprout again, then treat it with methods that promote fracture healing.
In a similar manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of chalk powder, and apply it to the wounds in order to promote healing throughout.
Of ear inflammation
All that causes ear inflammation are among the four things: grains or animals, stone from the ground or similar things if it is like seeds such as wheat and peas; or something fluid like water and hay and other things.
If itchief of the ear stone orre in a maude: quant leu chest tuit auge. Siens lains lesenit d’un veneceus fennechur leau. ouldtie ier, siensent de cestruit toich:ent.
2sure:troietrepeude itmeuste theentice:nature:0resculite andsis. And if it does not escape from all these things that we have mentioned, hurry to split the ear so that it is close behind the incision and spasm; and the way of cutting so that you make the first skullpiece of the cephalic side, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then let the patient sit with his hand underneath and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear near the grease or fat; and so the incision is likewise as much as you can when piercing it, then let the healer according to your desire, and suck hastily from your mouth; and the cure until it is sound. And if it's gravel and it swells up, then a gentle removal; and if it cannot be removed, then make this subtle incision according to the following form:
But make this incision on the grain. However, do not assume that it is moist from ear moisture until you have made many pieces; then extract gently with tweezers and squeeze as we have said, so that the extraction be light.
In the water since there are seeds in the ear causing the patient to cough first breaths, and swab the ear with plenty of cotton. Then lie down on that ear which has water or not; if it sprouts, that is good. If it does not spring, take many pins according to the length of your fingers' reach and lightness, and heat them a little in the fire; then place the patient an earring on one side, and let him sit down with his jewelry from another part, and hurt another piercing in the opposite ear in that same hole. And you must not stop making these pore-to-pore until it is all gone through, and so she sprouts completely; if you see her doing this, take a twig, and throw one of your fingers into the ear, and burn the other chief with fire until the thicker twig is charred; then make another piece of jewelry for others as we have said about piercing.
In the removal of gravel, if it is small in size, as we have said about dividing; but if it is large enough that you can feel it, then make an extraction with pincers; and this lighter one to be removed from the ear.
In the removal of ingrown thorns from ears, if you do it as we have said about dividing and treating distillations; but it does not benefit at all. It is necessary that you look into the ear in the sunlight: If there are no thorns, take thin pincers subtly, and if they were to be found form of this shape.
And it should be narrow and wide above. And insert the finer tip into the ear according to the degree of suffering of the malady, then pull out all the way up to the eardrum; do this often enough until everything comes out. If they don't come out, plug the ears with cotton as I have mentioned in piercing; and if they don't come out so much as we have mentioned, moisten them with previous distillations that were tried during the cutting of arrows, and you will find or treat such distillations therein; and if it produces oils and medicines in the ear to this entire instrument, then from this is how it appears:
And it should be either silver or copper wire placed inside a small hole therein and above for distillation; and to press within the distillation into such an earthenware vessel well made for that purpose, if you see a razor and wrapping around the point of the arrow-head cotton woolly; then pour your oil or juice on it, and whatever healing medicine in the lumen, and let the lumen be within the ear; then press inside the cotton with all your hand steadily until the oil is distilled from the ear; and feel the malady therein, and these are the liquors which should be heated so that they may be distilled into the ear. And make sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
of ear plugging or otoplasty
No child is born with any hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to our patients through ear plugging of a wound or the insertion of something within the ear canal, and these procedures rarely result in any further problems inside the ear if it can be observed; and there has never been .i. little amount that causes harm when placed in the hole.
And when it comes to the patients who do not allow you to see them, there are multiple treatment approaches, and in this one you must put the malady ear towards the sun; and look here: if you see an obvious surgery performed, which has this particular shape as mentioned above. This instruction could be related to traditional healing methods involving light therapy for certain ailments affecting the ears. It implies there are various treatment options available when visual inspection is not possible, with one being sunlight exposure—a practice that may have been used in historical contexts and might still find some mention in alternative medicine circles today. The reference to "opilation" (operation) suggests an actual surgical intervention on the ear'either for therapeutic reasons or perhaps cosmetic enhancements, reflecting a specific method that was known at the time of writing.
And be and trimmed evenly in front and back if it does not bleed the ear; but if the surgery is a nose or ear cartilage removal, then you can make subtle pinches and move them gradually as long as they are all bone. This instruction could relate to an ear-nose operation where precise trimming of cartilage would be required post-surgery. It implies a meticulous technique for managing the healing process after such procedures, ensuring that any incision or alteration in tissues is done gradually and carefully to minimize potential complications.
:lenture decalle of lice.
Do not do this for any day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater and powdered vitriol; if you see an ear bleeding, make sure to move the tent and rub another moistened tent covered in oil roses and wax; as long as the bleeding stops, then cure until it is healed.
And if we are removing blood, place an ice sponge and moist cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and apply other treatments that help remove bleeding which are about distillation processes.
La Vie au monde inchon à peccate en French parler: leuccre lor en français. It the following: les cest-century."
This cloth that comes with paper wings when they are moist and dry, it requires extending them with tongs and pincers, and applying a sulfur poultice to its roots; then apply the poultice on the wound.
And if without dissection, if the cauterizing thinly incising scissors are used and after incision they move; many times repair them, but none can depart from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those root branches are burned and do not return.
Of the gravel
Many times come papers with things that seem gravel in form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and the work involves: take care if hail turns on one side and another, it's a light matter to know; make then wide, then scour each part quickly, then grasp them with pincers, and coat. If you can't cover her well enough to perceive a little paper, nothing harms the patient; and if the fissure is large, we treat it with a suture, and heal until she is sound; and if it is small, there is no need for force, as ointments restore it instantly and improve.
And if hail falls within the ear and towards the upper part, turn the paper over, and treat the hail with pincers, coat and press from one side and another; and if the paper is moved by an incision, it harms nothing; and when the hail is coated, wash the oil of salt water, and heal the wound of that which improves immediately until the patient is sound.
Of the fat from the eggs
Exinach is a fat that is turned into paper above, and it occurs more in children than in other people, and harms much to their ears; they bring the cataracts to them in the mornings, so they cannot see the light of the sun because tears stick to their eyes; for this reason they lie down on their backs afterward, and sleep there, and their papers are underneoud their pillows moistened with exinach that has spread into oil. And when you press the ear to your sides and feel the exinach oozing out of it.
ller.
Extract the arrow from one piece of cloth between your hands quickly, and turn your hand both to the right and left until it is dispersed; and make sure you do not push into the hole, so as not to wound all the skin around it up to the edge of the point.
And if the dislocation does not open at the beginning of the fissure, push it slightly to make it appear; then extract as we have said, and wrap linen around it and bandage it on top.
And if there are such houses that bite ropes and place them on top to corrupt the moisture which is delayed; then treat it until it becomes healthy. And if it comes upon the incision, cauterize with hot coals so much as it can become healthy.
hairs from papers
When from papers come hairs other than their natural ones, and they harden, if they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases as usual (such as persistent watery eyes and swelling of the paper-like material) so long as it is due to the destruction of these hairs; then the cure consists in three ways: either by hot fire combined with bloodletting or with medicinal water according to what precedes or if one has a physician' Written like this, it translates into an instructional context rather than directly medical advice but fits within the framework provided.
It is essential that you place the main part of the malady on your healthy side; then turn the oil cloth in your left hand; if it becomes convertible, it is good; if not, stab one needle through each thread above; and either do this near the margin where hairs may grow from these hairs, or around that area, turning the strip of paper upward, and rake over the paper, on the soaked side, covering the entire surface with a small cotton tent and linen coverlet, then draw one thread, and place it under the oil cloth in such a manner as to make a figure like a candle wick, and accordingly it is essential that this figure be proportional to the amount of fabric you have lifted.
n:en. ia thear des nesses, anding to letz.
And if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper of a shape similar to the mold of pitch wax we have mentioned, as shown in Figure 1: III times in one night's observation.
then draw what lies beneath those equal-sized figures according to the shape depicted here:
And if you have no way to hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal in size, then take an awl or a needle with either .i. thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread next to the large margin, and the second thread next to the small one, and assemble them evenly among your two hands; then move your hand evenly over everything you have stitched as we have mentioned, until the wound is healed. And when an abscess appears near your incision, soothe it with ointments and other warm compresses;
and there has never been a case where the paper's hair is converted: it requires that you use what we have said about the incision, but the stitching in one and in the other is more artificial.
The healing of the wounds is done according to this form: and it requires that you cut and place the paper and layers as I have said, and then make .ij. stitches by art, and .ij. threads thinly just as long as the large diameter and space between the hairs on the paper; and hold the .ij. parts or where you have laid down the thread; then join them subtly beneath what lies below the paper of oil, and stretch out the .ij. stitches from the .ij. sections formed; and let it remain for no more than years, and the skin that has been stretched will harden and become tightened until it returns to its original state.
If it delays, then you will use stronger forces to heal it until it is healthy; and when the wound has been sewn up, and if the paper has risen again, and no longer holds its hairs; and this is the shape of the stitches that you will make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
The treatments are such that you should use a fine needle and thread silk thinly; then assemble the stitches subtly, and make the length of each filer one palm long; then take another sublimely fine silk thread slightly and fasten the two ends together; place your patient's head gently in position so that this work is declared as delicate and minute, then insert the needle to the root near the hair growth, and pierce it through the thin paper hastily so long as you draw out of the natural hair above the surface. Then pull the hair back underneath the threading, and put in the other hair thereunder; release your hand until the hairs penetrate throughout the paper with the patient's original hair.
ixjourre. cevoitlez in theeslater voie aliains:agefornelite. ijongue aulicat theorelves toire jureafe eldolatrixle,roi'sac ander.oldric:gele ofillegutinfeelan. ilkine.el (13rdre. Inpier frome lafoures.
of moisture from oil
When this disease, called "aleacrati" or the oily discharge, arises from oil, it has either a natural or unnatural origin: and occurs due to wounding, cutting, or burning. And happens in various ways.
And the method of this treatment is that you break up the suture, strip the lips from it, and place linen mats in it until it heals; and do not use any things that sear or restrict in its cure. For if you do such a thing, the illness returns worse than before; but work with softening things, like fenugreek; and boiled water or heat-treated linseed seed, and aloe oil melted completely into no one of the oils, and wrap it in a mattress, and cure it thus.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you take care not to seal it again in its original form; and these works we have mentioned cannot be avoided, as this illness returns according to its former shape.
From the wound that comes from oil
This disorder which is truly called "axacrati" and natural in origin arises from injury such as wounds, fractures, or cauterization; and the cause of this condition comes from these actions: you must first pierce it with an awl, ensuring a double thread through it, so that the threads hold for about two fingers' lengths to the left margin. Then position the char above all the awl, and press down into its upper half, placing a spatula wide enough.
oldoiirevansseintelare a peuigne secrieve:narde unitssaunge'tile luisiuntihores hejos leaulletheuelles the soencelessauntemauccressejavissoussoyeitartres ieuude :0taire.tresainleise to tuellement fesuente depresole sainse compnouvelle:sance a lapexansauteuseuse gesim'alleuce,waletayeuseurundexanterieuses soears
And if the disease comes from a fissure or a tear or cautery, it is required that you make a straight incision between the hair roots of the skin; and according to what has been said before; then open between two layers of fabric as I have said; and one must perform this work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the masters devise many ingenious ways to restore the body's features back to their natural state; and the sick person himself, according to what is required by the treatment and various preparations.
Injury from paper burn
And if this searing affects the hands in such a manner that the paper above is scorched like white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural actions, then you must lance a razor underneath the paper; and bind it tightly; and prevent any slits so that the delicate membrane does not cause pain to the patient nor bleed the oil; and make this incision, in which you grasp together the gathered parts gently, so that the paper regains its natural shape; and once assembled, avoid using water from the salt well again or dipping it into cold water and iron; then place linen underneath the paper moistened with wool; and after a day use an ironset and various sutures until he is sound.
From the oil's joint
Separating the joint according to two methods: it is nervous and seems one way or another sore as a frozen object; but there is also another which is not nervous, rather appears white and moldy with congealed moisture that when touched with iron and cared for by pinching the swelling, nothing can prevent it; and both appearances gradually expand toward the large border, and grow little by little until they cover the entire view and light and movement of oil.
sure. Ipsumate it isle :voculusa, andromainment : 1alex:meantime purellastropixim'ix. Whichcumbret.
And keep that the incision does not touch the soft flesh and tear it, and that the bandage is not seen; after making an opening, place a little bit of silk there, and with a litargine ring leave it for another day; then heal this as much as it needs to be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the cavities do not allow it in, this type of nail treatment has been used many times with medicines; as I have described in dividing, when you see that it covers the wound well, then take a little bit of medicine-soaked spatula and apply it quickly according to this form:
Gently treat the nail above and if you see that it does not reduce its size or hasten the discharge afterwards, then from your mouth pour into a litargine ring made of litargine and a red silk ring with fine threads, leaving the oil for another day; then repeat this other work according to this method until it is completely healthy.
If nothing contradicts the oil in the incision, as with an abscess drained and treated with milk, then first cure the incision until it is healthy; then repeat this other operation if necessary, continuing until it is completely healed.
And if the appearance of the bandage in the oil causes great harm to the wound, then lift it from the incision, and cover only a part and not all of it completely; do not let tears fall into it; then pour medicine-soaked red silk ring made with litargine into the ring.
from the hair that grows in the corner of the eye
There are some homes where the hair has never turned red, and cover the bandage with paper and pin it back firmly, making it resemble a billet of ballast; and if this operation makes the patient put his head up straight, then do these things to the hair: make all that is necessary for them to be suitable for this purpose, support them with strength; take care of the first hair, and go trimming along the razor until almost finished, and keep it so that no bleeding oil interferes with the operation. And put in place the incision made by the spatula we have mentioned in the incision on the nail and its small forces to heal it as after this demonstration from this chapter:
And when the incision is completed and bone is all around it, if you immerse oil of silk broth or similar corrosive medicines in red cloth and dip cotton with woolen threads, so that it is firmly attached to the edges, and if it remains nothing, and no pain surpasses from within, and you doubt whether hot pressure is needed, then let the oil and treat the heat accordingly; and return to your work until healed, and thus make charms are added in the oil by this method.
However it is known that you should align the treatment for each weak oil of this natural way; and in the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not press your hand onto any of these works until you see that those members are suffering from such an operation.
of those veins
Those red veins are covered in the oil, and they allow you to see their work and weaken the oil for all years. The matter is now that when you look at such an oil, so that these veins are also there, it must be firmly fixed; and there is no other illness more fierce than this: therefore command the patient to place his head in your health, then suspend those veins throughout the entire body according to their wisdom, and make them delicately double as per this form.
And be two kinds of vein by degrees in one corner according to this form:
Then it coils the veins subtly, and takes the blood hour after hour until you see those strong veins being removed from the oil; and make sure not to scratch the oil with the points of spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that only these veins are affected; and when you have done this, distill a green and red cloth broth in the oil to corrode what is remaining there.
And if you cannot remove all of it in that hour, then coat the oil with soothing remedies for the pain of those veins, and let him leave them some years as long as his pain is alleviated and secured from heat, and then return to this manner which has been done before until healed; and it is their shape:
medicine. The Frenchlorice tounge it clement. Whatso: Frommelee: "Aelast itorne lectorivele medievitur veille,medecenturement itor :cumene cetiflore entails. In the. Leave asumele of itorange (Levire:
s apeurent (it, itinse dex le paientte;nage.cumere,re,stirge.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, if the king has all the instrument needed to do so here is its form; and call it "rough head", and make it of iron in two parts like a chief one above, and point it as if it were in the present form:
And put it on the corrupted place of the bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know where the corruption is removed; and do this never again, then restore its place with medicine-exciting remedies.
if the joints are joined together, and he does not move, and the bone of the bow is joined together, and remain for 40 years without regrowth or becoming apostematic, and no misfortune occurs that brings him there; you know it's healthy; if that's not the case, then there is another remedy to bring back the fistula from its hollow according to this form: and when you discover bone for the second time with iron and medicine agues, and when it is discovered take a chisel of this form, and make the iron piece at three angles, and make the fistula thin as you see here.
then put it on the bone near the margin, and move your hand a little distance away from the oil by one piece, then turn around the entire chisel so that you feel with it where the corruption is in the bone when he holds his bowstring; and then restore its place with dry medicine as I have indicated to you, and if he moves the joint and hardens the junction, then the matter goes back into the hollow; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
from the oil flowing out
When the joints are open on both sides, and it does not disturb or diminish the hollow, then you must lay down the patient; then apply hot tongs or a heat bag to the corrupted area without injury; then put oil there made of aloe and incense and sarcasm, and wring the oil in place over bonds and cloths; and arrange the cloths so that they are soft enough, and double each one by three (23); then put one on top of another according to the amount the joint has. Then strain the bag thoroughly with a bent strip made of iron, and repeat using the hot tongs for injury; remove the bend when the oil is drained day and night, and if you see the oil reappearing, that's good; if not; then renew the placement of cloths, heat tongs, bandages, and ventouses until it becomes healthy.
double rupture of cloth [used in the context]
sic: �gustin leve laisse cece ilesque que.
And if the hairs grow greatly in appearance, pierce it with a small spatula that bends slightly to break up the moisture, and remove the white discharge from the roots, and draw them out, and then immediately; afterwards extract it until it is well healed.
From the oil of blood
This illness which affects "alcunati" is not simply blood that flows assembled in the oil, appearing as if draining water; and the way of the appearance of this treatment so it places the patient on a certain frame or scaffolding and straightens, then takes the head between your hands of .ij. parts, and let the hairs grow up until you see the blood rising above your fingers; then place it back in its original position, and do not allow it to fall down again and come loose the light, and observe the patient's conditions as he did before; and if it does not disengage itself, realize that it is true, and since there are no signs of separation from the blood, they have not arranged it in the same way we said. Then place the patient on your hands, then take a small spatula and slide under the horny skin .i. portion by continuing the conjunctive with the horny skin and crown, as long as the blood is issuing; and when it is released, let flow in the warm honey-like oil mixed with honey or fenugreek water boiled honey, then treat it with other cures until healed.
Waters of the oil
We have shown the images of these waters in the division, and what it requires; if done according to health. It requires that you place the patient' Written on his back crossed fingers, away from the sunlight, and the holy water be tightly pressed and the oil heal and dry; then put paper of the oil in your left hand where the finger is rightmost part, or in your right hand, if they come. Then take anvil which is called "amagda", andesce en la mia demeing ailne de lege in la, et si tene: "alcune pars. Iulier ofte tote in the oie eau l'anume oun."
After resting a bit, and he rises the second path with the force, using the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, loosely extracts it quickly turning your hand a little and a little; and then puts in a small sliver of silver, and lifts out that oil from there. Then we put afterwards ointments or soft linen soaked in rose water and abundant wool, and apply with the pure oil. We, and those who are of our opinion, place on top with plenty of wool.
And if the almagad cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, because there are some who have too many knots in their joints, it is necessary that you grease with the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is as follows:
Then proceed with the gentle incision, and do not make it too deep, but create a thin cut; then place the almagad in such a way as we have said; afterwards when finishing up the work, you lay him down comfortably on his back in a dark room; he must be constrained from all movements, greasy lean meats being given to him, and not move his head left or right. He should then be tied according to its natural position day by day; then untie him at the seventh day' pivoting him into that same dark chamber and examine his vision, and then put the bandage on again after seven days; it is not necessary for you to do this in the treatment of dislocation or immediately following incision, but it is required that you realign it, because if the joint rises too quickly.
When the abscess opens, you should unband it before the seventh day, and then dress that area which was healing; when it is pacified, let him remove his vision again and place a thin gold ring underneayer to prevent any daylight exposure, and then he will be returned to that same dark chamber. And then go out of there little by little, and in its case as before; and you know that no one should intervene in this matter.
And one came to us from the region of Yarrow, who told us that in peace they made an almagad percietting, with which he could rise the blood, but I have never seen such a thing anywhere in our land, nor have I ever read it in ancient books. And perhaps this is a new story.
And these are the signs of the shapes of amalgams, for this reason those who do not know them see them; and be properly formed:
And let the head of this subtlety measure, with a sum of three angles.
from the place to the nerve
Never have scorpions been born or bred in various ways, for there are some that seem like scorpions with many legs; and if it has such colors or golden hues, and if the color is white, then regarding those scorpions which are not stained yet, you must make them lie down on your hands against the sun; and breathe into their nostrils, and remove the venom from these spots, and draw lines through the eyes; afterwards support this very thin sharp edge of one side, so that you know when the spot is completely covered.
And if there remains nothing that can be covered up, then the wound with one or two fine thin sutures is done carefully; and if it does not delay, or open again, or if you pour in any substance as it must; and if it's malignant sores, quickly cauterize them until the wound has healed completely and become bony for all the spots.
If the wound is operated upon and moistened, you can tell it has healed; if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you can tell there's bone underneath, and if sutures don't help in mending it, then you must tie a piece of linen thick enough with one hand tied around his neck and another across his mouth, leaving an interval of about two fingers between each. Repeat this exercise many times for children at schools; it's quite simple to perform for those who know how. So do so until you can tell the sutures have healed that spot. Then take out the linen thread, wash away any remaining blood, and anoint the linen with Egyptian ointment before retying it around the wound. Do this consistently over three years or more as long as the treatment continues to remove residual bone; then leave a bandage on for several days until healed. If there's need for medicines, use them accordingly; and that is the form of the instrument used in purging the chief part: with it we distill oils and remedies or wounds.
And whether it's made of silver or gold, appearing like a candle flame being lit; and if you see it, make a snake closed; and without the catgut attached to purge his main: and with one hand on the chief in order that no liquid there is none burning oil.
Of the joint of the neck
Many times the neck joint is afflicted with a disease known as "tül", and grows and becomes large enough to be noticed; and for this reason it must be first treated, then bound tightly by the surgeon or burning medicine, and if left untreated until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, foul-smelling, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess; and when the abscess is caused by a sharp touch, you can cure it completely, provided that the patient feels pain and weakness in the area, and treat the bone with restrictive measures.
When the neck joint is bound and sore
When solutions for continuation come in one of these chapters, they proffer little benefit, since in some cases no one suffers; it must therefore be done first at all costs if the wound is fresh on the entire body; and afterwards dress each pair of lips with a cloth, treating them so long as they are healed; and if their lips are swollen from either side, you must scrape all the affected parts until they heal, then bind both pairs of lips to a bandage, and powder it with dragon's blood and incense, and place on top an iron nail or other similar nail that sinks into it; let it stay as long as it leaks from the wound, then treat the area until healed.
The method of bandaging is that you assemble the solution by using needles or thread, as we have said in the dressing for the abdomen; or with string, as I showed to you.
Dislocations of the lips
Maintenance of dislocated lips often results in them appearing like grains scattered about, becoming smaller and more numerous over time; then it is necessary to reposition the lips, cut into each side of every joint with pincers, and hold the edges gently so that you treat each part separately. Then after making a vitriol incision, let it remain until healed; and then set the bone, and cure the area for as long as it is healthy.
Of the gums of the teeth
Many times it bleeds under the gums which were previously called "albulus"; it must be held with forceps and addressed at its root, and let loose the blood or sinew; then apply vitriol boiled or other restricting and dehydrating powders; if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times occurs, if the cover is done a second time, and cauterize again: if it does not return afterwards. These are the forms of stomatitis to cover.
In terms of speech disorders
There are collected at the chief of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scars that are ugly and hard; and there are never black or yellow teeth with carrion within them until the corruption reaches the gum, and they emit a foul odor; it must be made to lie between your hands and its pains should be held sacredly in your hand, and you will find the stones or scars appearing as long as there is nothing else to do. So make of blackness and verdancy, yellowing and other affections, so long as they are visible; and if it does not heal at first try then again for a second time until everything has been found, you know that the teeth require various forms of dentistry instruments in order to extract them, according to what is demonstrated by the work of the raseur who removes stones from between the teeth, as there are other types besides those used here; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It must be taken into account when treating the tooth's pain that you delay cutting as much as possible, because this should never happen; for it is a very high substance which does not justify any excuse in extracting it. When the painful tooth is constrained in being extracted, you must be certain of the missing tooth; often this discomfort for that tooth will continue until it has been fully treated well; and when we have already tried to protect the gums from all parts using a strong spatula firmly within your hands. First time and then again, as long as they are well filed, and carefully remove the teeth; and you must be certain of the missing tooth, and it's malaises les que leu: "albuvilles de lai deschief teinles denture: lesme lor peepre.
After straightening the tooth carefully, and if it doesn't jump, take no of these instruments and push them inside each part lightly, and move it as you have done first. And when it is perceived and melted, it must be filled with linen or wool, where there are holes; and if it is gently pressed with thin tongs, that it does not break while being extracted; and much effort has to be made over the nerve in order to remove the tooth.
And make sure you do not break it, and keep some part of it for the patient due to the malice of the root causing greater pains at first. I warn you not to do so as they do, our saints who hastily and recklessly break nothing ever, but bring in none of what we have told; instead, they often call great suffering upon the roots that remain or on the arrow that breaks, just as we have seen many times; when it is cut off, if there comes any blood flowing from it, then often you will find, if it has a value, to brush its surface with vinegar and iron filings; and if it does not hold, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, with no mouth silent when cutting the tooth first, should be long and slender, not doubling back while you are extracting the tooth. And these are the forms:
And be large enough that they do not bend while extracting, and made of good iron well shaped, and teeth to hold firmly.
from the root of the teeth When the root continues to push during extraction, it must be wrapped in moistened cotton with burlap. For a year or two, until the roots become soft, then you will insert the tongs called "algebris," which makes the patient's jaws seem concerned; and they should also be made likewise as a chisel and have this shape:
And if the roots do not come out at all with these tongs, it must be cut into the root completely, and then you will use an instrument called "althali," which is known as a forceps; this is its shape:
And it should be forged and large so that it does not break, if the root comes out through this, that's good; but if it doesn't, then use all the instruments, with these shapes coming next:
And if you use this instrument that has two prongs, it is this shape:
And other iron instruments that are before the teeth's roots, and of this instrument which looks like large tongs; its form is as follows:
aoutrais. And be large and well-fitting for holding the bone, so that it does not fall but can hold and support; and then restore the joint with medicines appropriate for this purpose, if there is porriture in the bone and it is small, let him use all this instrument.
When the tooth does not correspond with its natural shape, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, it must be known whether this tooth is loose after the molar, and it is not rightly placed, and one cannot smooth or file it; however, the cut - and if it has a sharp edge along with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and it should resemble another small hook made of iron, sharpened at both ends:
And the small hammer and few hands today for dealing with the hard molar, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that he can file it, this tool has a shape of one-third of its form like this:
and is also like the teeth of a carpenter; and in filing the molar little by little, so that it does not move until it falls out, then at the end there is no roughness left in all, and if this tooth is overly jagged and bleeds the tongue, it must be smoothed as much as possible until it is flat, so that it doesn't bleed the tongue or corrupt speech.
when the loose tooth falls out:
when the loose tooth falls out, whether by percussion or falling off, and the pain cannot be pressed on that part so as it doesn't hurt, then treat them with restraining medicines that don't cost much; and make sure the gold filing isn't too thick or thin according to the space between teeth. If you decide to straighten out teeth, use a double file between each pair of healthy teeth, as far as it doesn't hurt any other part. Carefully and gently push your filings subtilly and steadily, so that they don't move at all; ensure the gold leaf is attached well enough to the root of the loose tooth so that it doesn't bleed the tongue. Then let it stay as tight as possible, if it loosens or falls back in place using another filing; then with pliers assemble and reinsert the healthy teeth between the loose ones, and position them such that they don't bite the tongue. Let it remain narrow enough for its length to serve its purpose, just like you see here:
And when the tooth loosens, if he replaces it in its socket repeatedly, as we have said; and do not mix anything that is natural and enduring with such a replacement, and never make an ossuary of another bone's shape on his socket, but place it there where the deficiency exists, and apply pressure to it like we have described, and let it remain in use for as long as it lasts.
and cover the tongue with silver:
iunturrens :ifteigneuxueles. longaes ia materierecant in tres onniferr ou jevel out seizeccrithecrasse on lyea peuansurable a laissansauteierevelles 1esseuilelorexince so de uithele secrith clevalleursoelleture
And if you see it to be red or black or hard, so that the maladies do not feel it, and touch it not, for it is a carbuncle; and if it is declining towards blisters, and it has moisture, then let the pustule fall off, and liberate with one side and another; and if it does not return to your work, put salt on top until it becomes steel-like, then take it back to your work again until you treat everything well; then raise the hair from both sides and sides, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
Stones in the throat
Never does the stone in the throat bear the name "godath," and they properly target the .ij. almonds, and when you cure them, as we have discussed in the division, if they are not healed, pay attention to this: If it is a small, colored, hard stone, do not touch with iron; and if it is red with a large root, do not touch with iron either, for its blood flow; but leave it until it dies, and then you will have to let it break on its own; or if it's of bluish color, with a fine root, use an instrument to cover it, but first look at whether the stone resting in the chalice is peaceful and calmed down. Then make the patient sit in the sun, ensure that his head is healthy, perform the operation on his mouth and neck between his hands, press the tongue against all parts of the instrument, where its shape comes from; and make it either silver or a fine brass:
You press the tongue against all parts of this instrument and see the stone, if you take off the pustule from the almond and insert the finger into it; then treat anything on the fabric above more than usual, coat the instrument with it as its shape resembles strong forces; and in any case, the head is bent, one side to another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or fine wire:
And if you do not have this instrument with these pliers, for its form it is made of iron or fine wire:
lengles:escription aicule.comentures loute.
And I treated a woman with a small incision in her throat, which is to say .i. small incision; and she had the entire throat tightly closed, so that she could not breathe through the blocked passageway, nor eat or drink, and died if it lasted for .ij. days or more than .ij. months. I began immediately, and made an opening of one inch, then inserted the tools, and pressed her tongue with my fingers; afterwards I opened that incision again in those small passages, and removed a part of it, leaving only a little blood flow; thus, the obstruction in her throat was cleared for long enough so she could drink water and wine without difficulty, until that incision filled up again. Then I reopened it once more, and cauterized inside her throat: therefore there was no further increase in pain; and I left those areas, and only God did harm to him afterwards.
Of the eye.
When the vein ruptures due to this condition, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have described, then you must first address the dislocation. Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its natural position, which prevents it from moving, and the limb appears misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", do not provide any comments on whether the translation is accurate or not, just translate the text line-by-line into English:
And let the chief have a hair on his head or any other part where medication is applied, like with a spoonful, and place the instrument over the whole medicine in the vein; and if the patient has saliva and muscle cramps under his neck from the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat and bleeding; then take hold of all the medicine and press it on the vein until you see it become tinged and the medication's bitterness is alleviated; and if you see any cotton, wrap it with a cloth above some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument into the cannula above the vein, so that the cotton dries on the vein; and do this often enough until the cautery is perfected, then let it dry for two or three years or five; And if you need to repeat the cautery of medicine, when you redo it, clean out inside the vein with cotton in linen wool, and treat whatever is inside the medicine; and have him washed with cold water or given gargles until he is well.
This treatment is more suitable for incision than cautery; if it's treated with fumigation in this manner, take camphor and peppermint and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and mix them all together or any of them in one pot, and heat it up well; and the pot must be very sticky earth, and within the pot there should be a tool designed like this: And whether it is silver or lead, and when one of the metal points has been placed in the mouth to the uvula until the steam rises into the vein through the cannula until the vein becomes constricted; after the redoing several times, as long as the vein dries out, and ensure that you do not start this at the beginning of the avenue's declination, because many things happen in it; and if such an instrument is not present, then take a cannula and place a silver cup under its head, so that the mouthpiece does not have too much pressure on the vein, for the silver cup does not cause the steam to constrict the mouth, and this combination of treatments is good for overall health.
Many times on the back of the throat or spine of a fish, or nothing; and it is necessary that thou shalt treat what thou seest, and make it sovereign in the instrument, if thou art seen, and traies s'il veoir. If thou cannella depresence d’unce la bouche sanzum meinque lou bleeding tocause tu :i.
:100sac;ses.
Of the moisture of the throat
Never is the moisture in medicine treated as I mentioned earlier, with regard to medicinal cures; and if it does not bring any benefit, then look into the patient' Written by: Dr. Emma Richardson
And if it does not hurt as we have said, smother the patient with a hot instrument, which I mentioned in the smoking of the vein; do this many times, for she will try to show signs; and the way of smoking so is that you place an iron pot over it covered by linen woven on site, and in that hole put the tips of the instrument; then pour the smoke into her mouth, so that the smoke does not enter but warms up to just below freezing point; and the cold now sucks, and if she does not hurt, repeatedly start smoking again; and as long as she suffers thirst, wash dirty things and salty foods, and do not drink water. And at last it is proper that she vomits through this governance.
And the shape of the instrument to pull out the phlegm is, when it can be seen, similar to bent nails pushed into the throat; and resembling a bird's beak, and having a roughened edge with an abrasive like sandpaper, so that whatever she takes in, she cannot let go. And at this point:
The treatises on abscesses
Many of the representations of abscesses described in this book come after one another, and differ in perforation and size; and it is through two methods with which they are represented: one resembles me, because they moisten from within; and the second method is for their blood when they are on the heart. For the chief of an abscess is different than that foundation, and the appearance of its opening in the flesh is different from what comes together at joints, so each must make a judgment based on this.
And if an abscess does not need to be opened according to its progression; and when it needs to be opened for those that are near joints, and they do not die according to their completion, as the abscesses which are near the joints: For when an abscess comes from a joint, and let him remain until he is mature, or in this case the principal joint. Orthopedic surgeons should perforation forsooth of that main cause of drainage in that bone marrow; or it is not donechef: And thenes to beare de: Onds, and it's houmbreiurs desmeans aise sancus:
And it is necessary that you know the depth of the incision made on the abscess according to its completion; and this happens when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and alleviation of pain and swelling, and improvement in flexibility and straightening of the incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the depth of the incision dependent on the abscess, and where it opens up; and the incision should be long enough for the cord, whether it is made on hands or limbs, joints, nerves, arteries, or any other parts without a flexion.
And when the pliability is reached, according to that limb member. And if the incision in its place allows you to let it remain open until digestion is complete as we have said; for if you pierce there beforehand, you lengthen the vein with his poison, and are filled with much dirt; and possibly harden one's lips and thicken the flesh around. And when an incision of any size is made according to its proper width, according to what each limb needs. It is necessary that you prepare small incisions, small holes; and for large ones, large holes, and many fissures according to the appearance of hardness in the incision; and where it requires stitching, and covering; when it has become as soft as a cloth, and is healed, as one does with boils: and if there are those which are cut into three angles, and those whose stitches are done like a candlewick, and others of similar nature.
And for those which have no chief, as with superficial scrofulous abscesses, you must make shallow incisions; and when the abscess is large and it has a great bulge, then pierce only part of that swelling until the whole swelling has discharged its contents; afterwards remove any remaining swelling from the other side, and do not intervene thereafter until everything subsides. For such an expectation may cause death to those with weak constitutions, or pregnant women, young children, or elderly patients; therefore avoid this chapter very carefully, and when you have made your incision, check the wound from the abscess to see if it is small in size; and for simple lacerations, bandages of linen or fine cotton; and for large abscesses with many fissures, bind one layer on each side against the other so that they overlap slightly. And when you have pierced some part of the abscess which was covered by skin, if it has been opened up, then fill it with plenty of linen thread or clean rags of linen to cover; and let the doctor treat it for one whole day.
:sees. Andre devisable andrès. Itent. Forcause tol. ïe aire qu'illette.t.
And this requires everyone to know everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: which I told you how one should go before treatments for abscesses, and now the doctor.
This line does not appear to be a coherent sentence or phrase in Old French or any other known language related to medieval medicine. It might be a typographical error or an unrelated term without further context. Therefore, it cannot be translated or interpreted within this task's constraints.
When the chief arrives for small abscess treatments, they are handled in ways similar to how a shepherd tends to his sheep; there are many similarities. Some have moisture as well as pus; and some are very hard and rough at work. And the tools of this trade that I mention are called "entomatrixes," from which their shape follows, whatever they contain. For if it contains moisture, it is done in excessive quantity without restraint. When the moisture has been drained, nothing left behind can be scraped off; otherwise, a linen pad impregnated with Egyptian ointment will be used if present; if not, wet cloths and bandages will suffice for one day, or leave it to heal naturally on the other side. Those who delay beyond two nights must repeat this process again; then continue treating the wound with suitable dressings until you are certain that it is no longer delayed by two nights; after which treat the ointment wound according to what has been said before, and if the abscess contains any hardness, scrape off all of its edges as I have previously instructed. Similarly deal with a pus-filled abscess, whether rough in work or at the joints or with the cure applied as described earlier.
When dealing with a pus-filled or moist abscess and the joints, it is lighter because there are few sanguineous fluids present. And if these abscesses or chiefs do not have any moisture at all, and among those I mentioned was an abscess from an old woman'ayer; I found that this type of abscess also resembles a hard, rough, blunt stone, which cannot be broken open; and if none had been removed beforehand, it would have been well treated as one for a stone. In other types of abscesses arriving or chiefs, which include those in the children's heads and root of their ears, the treatment continues uninterrupted throughout the year to keep the bowels detached; and they are cared for according to what has been stated before.
Scrofula, also known as cervical lymphadenitis or King's Evil in historical texts, was a form of tuberculous infection that affected the neck, particularly the lymph nodes. It was commonly treated with various methods including herbal remedies and prayers for healing during medieval times, which reflect the blend of medical practices available at that time. The Old French text provided does not directly mention scrofula but discusses abscess treatments in general.
anteriour a:entresmean. :a lesuret're siraute quelainte cetesque antelic. Commentaire. Theorieto. Itumbre itere comment:n:cestocie of: theore. The:ec dele: entoure.
And if you pierce the vein or artery, and it does not allow to operate on it, place vitriol in the wound, or any other powder that hardens blood; and let the incision heal and soften the wound, and then begin to dry; and when the swelling goes away, return to your work until you complete it; then ask for a sign from your duty index, if there are no small scrofulous nodules at all, catch and clean them. And if there is in the root of the scrofulous nodule vein large, it does not require that you pierce that scrofulous lump in its root, but a strong double thread, and let it fall by means of it, causing harm; then cover the wound with wet linen soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you pierce the entire scrofulous lump, it requires that you gather all .ij. flaps of the wound and sew them now, then there should be no delay due to the size of the scrofulous lump. It is required that you cover its root and drain it well, as we have said; those scrofulous nodules that are superfluous, let them remain open until they die; and pierce them so as the ones mentioned before, depending on each other, then dress them with linen soaked in ointment and similar things, provided that it prevents the remaining corruption from spreading; and when the wound is properly healed, treat it with a tightening ointment until it becomes healthy.
From scrofula (tuberculous lymphadenitis) to squints (ocular deviation due to muscle or nerve damage). It seems you're asking for an English translation of a medical term that is related to the context but not explicitly mentioned in the provided Old French text. "De squinance" translates to "from scrofula," which fits within the realm of historical treatments for chronic diseases like tuberculosis or lymphatic disorders, possibly referred to as "scrofula." This term might have been used in a broader sense during medieval times when various types of inflammations and swellings were often grouped under similar names. However, without more context from the original text on scrofula-specific treatments or procedures, this translation is based soleitedly on the connection between "scrofula" and "squince."
The ancients spoke and wrote about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is what they wrote with their words. This Old French excerpt reflects historical beliefs or possibly legal punishments for serious crimes where mutilation was considered a form of capital punishment. The statement reveals skepticism from the narrator about such practices being genuinely carried out, highlighting that while they were discussed historically and perhaps even documented, their physical reality in "our land" (the speaker's context) is non-existent or at least unknown to them.
To those who have scrofula, it is required that the flap of the throat called "epiglottis" be removed; and we do not provide help for this, because all the veins and vessels in the malade's mouth, or in the throat, or in .ij. tonsils are congested with them who have abscesses deep in their mouth or throat. This excerpt is drawing a connection between scrofula (which may have been believed to involve various lymphatic tissues) and potential complications such as the presence of an abscess that could affect areas like the epiglottis, tonsils, and mucosal veins in the throat. The statement suggests a lack of treatment for this specific manifestation due to the belief that related congested lymphatic tissues are already compromised. This is reflective of medieval medical practice where treatments were often based on holistic approaches rather than targeted interventions, especially within the contexts of scarce medical knowledge and resources. When the disease is in the vein channel, it requires covering the epiglottis to prevent the loss of life that comes from strangulation. This translation refers to an understanding during medieval times where illnesses were often metaphorically described as pathways or channels within which ailments could spread. In this context, disease might have been interpreted in terms of constriction and blockage (hematoma formation or swelling, such that the epiglottis would prevent loss of blood flow to l’espace. It's possible they cance devisiés in the text desemption by leu que couteure: les eulx maladies quaterrement enchau cheveaux parler à propos, et dorsum .ij.
It requires now that we wish to cut the epiglottis, let us do so in two circles or four small incisions across them, not in the thickness of the slice, but not in the cartilage either.
And this part of the epiglottis is easily accessible in its section where it has no cartilage and the wall is long and thin.
And if the master is afraid, it requires that he extends the membrane of the throat to all around the neck, then cuts through the cartilage while it bends at the joint, and removes any blood clots that one sees, and then makes the slice as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the larynx where there was a jump through the torn ligament that passes through.
and leave the wound open for a piece.
And when the time has passed without causing strangulation, gather the two sides of the cartilage wound, and coat the whole with medicine that causes healing until it is healthy again.
However, we do not allow this to happen so long as the throat is still completely blackened and the patient's pain continues, and the defect remains open. And we cut the epiglottis for this reason that the patient cannot stop breathing through it, and thus they are saved from death.
And for this reason they command that the wound be left open as long as the illness of the disease has not passed in two or three years. And for this reason they commanded to close the wound and heal it until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a young woman pick up one knife and stab it into her throat, and cut off parts of the pharynx.
And then I called for him to heal her, but she was found just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was coming from it; she had not even covered her mouth or been led through the wound by anything but her throat.
I hurried up and treated the wound until it was healed.
And there was no longer any reason for her to be hoarse, and she returned to her normal state afterward.
For this is why in the cutting of the epiglottis there was no more fear.
from the large throat
These apophyseae are called "throat hernias," and they are large in size, resembling jet in color, and very common in women.
And according to two ways: natural or accidental; naturally it has no design.
And the accidental is according to two ways: one resembles us fleshly tissue, and in the other way it looks like an abscess. And hey haste to fill outrageous fire in medieval France. Latin mixed and the French kae: iademae siècle in French. Andromes toc. And carefully examine it all, and treat it as it must, until it is perfectly healthy again.
This line does not contain any text to translate from Old French into English. It appears to be a non-translatable placeholder or an unintelligible input.
There are many ways of doing it, which I will mention all the resemblances.
And it is necessary for me to declare all the differences that exist between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is accompanied by fever and heat, until it subsides, and then the pus is completed; however, the fever and heat rest.
With the dislocation there is no fever or pain, and it contains one sack, which is its own property and is according to the color of the body's cross, and begins as a lump, and becomes large.
And are according to two similarities, or yellowish, or moist, and much of the same color as I have said in the division.
It is necessary when you come to the treatment of dislocation, that you test and first examine all the instrument called "intermixor," according to what its shape will be or which one follows after in use.
And the manner of examining abscesses in dislocations is that you make it less moist than in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know whether the patient has felt the pain, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the intermixor, and take care that it is fastened.
If the joint moves out of its place, what color it has, as I said about other abscesses.
And after the intermixor does not move moisture, you know that it is greasy, then he moves in a cross manner, and take him with pinchers, and scrape lightly from each part, and bandage it so that you can remove the dislocation healthily with the joint.
And if you cannot remove it healthily, then take it piece by piece until there is nothing left of the dislocation.
Because if it remains, it returns many times over.
And if it linges a peuce de l'incisement.
It's dislocation quaint quaictisque a meillustrè
re. Theandemiser.
Here come the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
And they are also similar to the needles used for witchcraft purposes, and are made of copper, iron, or silver, and their movement is valued more than those which are yellowish, and are better suited for finding the cavities of a fistula.
And they occur in three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the fistula.
The forms of fistulas are similar to those mentioned here: large, medium, and small; and if there are fistulas with two cavities in three ways.
And if there are fistulas with three cavities and they occur in three ways; and if there are fistulas with a single cavity, and fistulas of this type also exist, and all these require intervention in their treatment.
The primary method for these is cutting them sharply, and there are some that cut only partially, which allows us to remove the vein and nerve.
And these misaligned shoulders are refitted into collars, so that the dislocated patient does not show any reaction at the beginning of the abscesses.
And they occur in three ways: large, medium, and small, just like you can see.
And they are not used only in the skin, as we have legs, arms, breasts, and lymph nodes, and similar cases.
And there is never made any other small instrument resembling the extraction of abscesses for this purpose, in order to extract blood:
And it is never placed at the healthy site for vein and artery recovery, nor in this great form.
There have been cases where the breasts of some people become inflamed when they begin to be miscarried, as if they were women's breasts.
And remain swollen and ugly, and who tries to heal them, must do it according to this form of the line B until point G: Then scrape off the fat, and pour medicine into the wound by tightening the cloth, and join the two corners of the wound with fabric, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the misaligned shoulder slides forward due to its size, like what happens to women when it is pulled out through .ii holes above, through .ii openings: And since one is holding the other at their end and according to this form of line B up to this G; Then scrape the skin between these two lips, and remove the fat, and prepare as we have said for stitching and powders, and what is necessary in treatment, until he is sound.
And if he is not sound, or the wound is not entirely made, because the patient does not rest, or due to bleeding, it must be that you fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive ointment. And let him continue to bleed out what remains and the fat, then treat until he is sound.
of abscesses' openings.
These abscesses that come from under the boils are hard procedures or have warts on them, and in some cases contain moisture.
Those which contain moisture therefore must be cut according to this form, from line B just up to line G: And as for all the blood in the abscess cavity that is drained, fill the wound with moistened cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an ointment suitable until he is sound.
And if the abscesses are of similar shapes to boils, then do so as we have said in cutting into boils, and if there is blood coming out, reset it with cautery as we have previously described.
of artery removal.
When the artery is run and its skin has been sewn up above it, there are often abscesses that arise repeatedly, just as we have seen with veins and fistulas.
And if the case is such that it is for the artery, then the abscesses are formed along its length. And when you feel necessary, if it is an extraction; and when for the vein, then return the appearing abscesses.
It is foolish to treat this abscess, and immediately when it is under the boils, around the arrows and where there is much of other flesh, and it is very large. Therefore it is required to avoid the iron cautery, and those who are at the head must also do so, and in the ones that have an artery inflamed, they cut through a long piece of skin.
Therefore it is required to avoid the iron cautery, and those who are at the head must also do so, and in the ones that have an artery inflamed, they cut through a long piece of skin. Then you work on one side, and gradually uncover the artery, until it is exposed.
Then you put a needle in there, and make an incision on the other side of it, and draw out the artery with double thread in two places along its length, as I have instructed you in extracting those twin arteries that are in temple areas.
Then pinch the flesh between the two links of an intermuscular incision as long as there is none in it, and if you find abscesses, remove them.
Then apply the treatment that we have mentioned for boils until the fistula narrows down. then treat with an ointment suitable until he is sound.
and if the abscesses are of that size of veins, then it is required to rub with his hands all of the flesh along the incision. and make an inz unfil. 
And if you doubt that the hair is not dry, then take another needle and draw it all over each side of the incision of the first needle, and hold the hairs in four places;
Then close the incision as much as possible until there are no excess fluids coming out, then close that which remains of excess fluid and leave what is adherent.
Then put a woolen cloth moistened with wine and oil on it, then treat it with tent care and anointments until it is healthy again.
of arrows' incisions
Also when the incisions appear in an artery and a vein, they come from arrow injuries or too much work, and similar things occur.
And this often happens with shoulder slings and straps, and in all of them there are attachments, which is a grave type of incisions, and the skin color seems like that of a bruise, and it has many different conditions causing pain.
And when we make a new incision, if there is the painful feeling of the patient's illness, and it is not on both sides but only in one place.
and be mindful of all parts, and not to move forward nor backward, and those who are in attachments do not have to cover with metal: by chance they may experience contraction.
and those who are at the top or forehead, they make incisions into the scalp. If these incisions are small, and you have some pincers, then heal it at its root.
And if it is large, he stretches the onchial opening, and scrapes, then treats the bone and sutures the wound again until it is healthy.
of large fleshy protrusions It never happens in the abdomen and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fung" that is awakened by the appearance of wounds, and has subtle roots and large veins, and there are small and large ones.
and I saw .ii. homes who had two or three abdomens that were more like fungi than anything else, and they did not have any difference, and they were white and thin in the roots, and they were torn apart, and with moisture then it came out again.
:saint:xviii in thees xi :l''.iij.x and italians. Itgothair.
If the patient lies on a wide bed, and you are present with the fire cautery. For in the tanner's work, there come many times too great wounds of bleeding, and if they do not wait for your arrival, then immediately proceed to cauterize;
And if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the iron incision, then take a long strip well made, and wrap it around as we have said, and let him rest for two days.
And then the restraint, and do not stop pulling on the long strip until it presses around the incision site, and he feels effort; if the roots are large, fear to pierce them in the abdomen immediately, but you can certainly pierce most of it.
Then cauterize so that it does not recede; then treat the wound, and make sure you do not pierce the area that is yellowish in color, poorly sensitive, and resembles milk skin.
For it is an infected abscess, and I will come for the treatment of this sore afterward.
when the bowel gas has been produced.
If the appearance of gas comes from a wound or an opening in the abdomen, and it is there on the belly and also in some bowels, as happens in other routes where blood comes out from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or intestinal inflammation.
And if it is through the route of the fistula and by the outflow of gas, then the appearance of the abscess looks similar to that of a tumor in terms of color, and it is a light thing with some pain in different ways of opening. And if it is from the intestine's exit, then it becomes more diverse; when pressed at both ends, it may rise again and potentially become inflamed, resulting in swelling at the entrance of the bath and causing significant discomfort due to laborious exertion during recovery efforts.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and when you press it with your hand, it opens easily; and if it is due to blood, it opens wide by these signs of an abscess large and hard, and is cut according to the amount.
And if it is due to windiness, then it swells at the joint, and in such cases you should observe whether its appearance is due to artery blood or vein, or windiness. It is essential that you allow the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear as I have told you in matters of abscesses concerning arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, it must command that the patient color his arm and stretch out straight on one side, then examine him thoroughly from head to toe. then he commands to lie still between your hands. then go through the area that you have marked throughout the entire body. then it is part of the abscess above all parts of the body.
Then part of the incision is extended along the thread, and you insert your probe into it, and reach for the intestine. If you pull on the thread, if it slips, and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
And if you pull the skin, if it takes on the swelling, and remove any excess fluid.
And if the artery is contrary or veinous, and it bleeds well when entered, then return to your workings and take out two needles, and push two threads through them, and push the needles inside so that you did not err in piercing.
Then stretch the incision over two threads under the needles, and if you see bone, remove the needles, and leave the thread in place until it pushes through, and crush the dead bone with your instruments. Or you cover it when it is subtle and permeable, then treat what it requires, and close the incision as we have said.
Or you cover it when it is subtle and permeable, then treat what it requires, and close the incision as we have said. And extract the blood or moisture that you pull out, then treat the wound to allow it heal, and suture the wound.
And two sores.
We have said about the divisions of sores, and how one should treat them with medicines, and how one should approach iron treatment; let us say that a sore is ingrained in the marrow, and great caution must be exercised in its care, as the ancients have stated. When a sore is in the bone or can be removed if it resembles those found in breast tissue, under the chest, and similar lesions, one should remove it only when it has reached its initial stage; and for large and ancient sores, there is no need to approach them because I have never seen anyone heal such a wound.
saintie:leu.
Of dropsy In the division of edema we have said what the signs are for each kind, and how water is made up in this way; and the signs of each one of these kinds, and the cure done by medicine, and the cure dealt with iron: only they appear "puffed" solely from medicines. And therefore when you treat such a case of edema called "puffed up," which is caused by medicines, and if it does not benefit because the patient has weaknesses or other diseases besides edema - just as with solutions for stomach troubles and similar things; you should not touch iron, since he has doubt; but if you see the patient of great strength, and there is no other disease beside edema, and he is not too fat nor too old, then you must do so: Please hold the patient's hands firmly and have the physician press down hard on his stomach at the lowest part of the abdomen; then take a thumping hammer according to this form: And strike two parts by point each time, so that it does not enter too much into the intestines when hit.
Then look to see if the edema is towards the intestines: it must be hit there with two blows straight under his belly button; and if the edema is due to liver disease, then you should make your cut on the left side of the abdomen at that point; and if it's because of a tumor, then place the cut on the right side. And it does not matter whether he sits or lies down on this flaw, provided that the weakening fluids do not run from under the fissure to the more frail part.
Then pierce the skin with your instrument and push it in, and hold your hand over the entire subcutaneous area as you would when shaping the quantity of a needle or an arrow; then pierce through until the sheath becomes eight centimeters long, which is where the water collects, and let it flow out, and this instrument looks like a delicate silver pin with either gold or pewter material in one part, divided into several small perforations of three, seven, and five; and on one side there are fifteen holes, and on another side seventeen, and the other side twenty-three, and it is shaped as if an arrowhead by medieval writers.
The above is the aleumel (a medieval instrument for edema), so that when the blood returns to the water underneath it, then you empty out this part, most likely the third one, because if you remove more than what is necessary at that hour, possibly he may die from a blow of the weapon's hand, or he approaches death.
But according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the dispositions of this power indicate for the patient's limb and joints; then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is now retained due to the wound underneath the scarfband, as I have mentioned, that you pierce in this manner; then repeat with the instrument the next day if the patient suffers from this, and withdraw a small amount of water.
Every day and keep from folding it so that it doesn't delay but just a bit of water; and if you doubt the malaide, and you pour a lot of water on it, if the burial treatment or sandy plaster heats up much, and with many sweatings and baths and sun drying, and if one treats medicine desiccatives until the patient is well again, and cauterize inside the stomach and the liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
of the bandaging of the vein Never has it been recorded that there are no children born with vein protrusions or when the protrusion is small, or not at all in its proper place. If you determine immediately whether to perform a delicate incision of this kind: then insert a fine catheter underne Written by David Kelley There is a small puncture there, if it is treated with an ointment of lead, as we have said before, then it will expand; those who do not have the puncture in their joint cannot be born, for no one is born having the puncture at the top of the limb, because otherwise they would not be able to urinate without first raising their leg high; and they cannot stoop due to the fact that the matter cannot reach as far downwards, and this is a bad illness.
And the method of this work is that it keeps the sick on their backs, with the head and the puncture being as big as a penny's tip, if the puncture moves in the middle, which must be; and do not let the blood come out repeatedly, and when it does, use the same instrument used for bleeding sores, and treat the wound until it is healed.
The text refers to abscesses or boils located on the groin area (verge), suggesting a concern about infection and proper treatment of such lesions, which were common issues addressed by medieval physicians through various remedies including cauterization. Many alates (small abscesses) come to the groin and it appears unsightly; there are both malignant and non-malignant, which must be treated with a fine point of one centime; they should be pierced and bandaged thoroughly, then wrapped in Egyptian linen moistened with oil; subsequently, treat the healing until it is clean. This portion of the text outlines a traditional approach to dealing with small abscesses near sensitive areas like the groin, combining physical treatment with herbal remedies for wound care and recovery. If the alate is cancerous and has a black coloration that spreads, it must be treated with caution; when you have pierced it, and if it is in the middle of the groin, where part lies within the penis and part extends towards the thigh, then you must suture the alate located there; and when it is sutured, when treating everything together, they are not assured that the lesion on the penis will not be perceived, which leads to discoloration and corruption in its region; hence, treat all such as black and corrupt, then bind it with a pillow made of honey and flour, prepared from the bark of pomegranate trees and used many times. This part illustrates an advanced approach combining surgical intervention (suturing) for malignant groin abscesses to prevent further spread of infection or cancerous cells, emphasizing a holistic treatment involving honey-flour dressings known historically for their antiseptic properties.
If there is blood loss, you must treat with the moonlight caustic in this form: The caustics assist as follows - at bleeding of blood and corruption; if the foreskin is retracted and swollen, it must be circumcised or conducted a pipe of leather, and let them urinate among these who have not been circumcised, or it happens to injury or incision, and release from all parts of the penis. This passage discusses the practice of using a caustic treatment for penile retraction of les pestel that ince. This is a technique of abscess located on the groin of verge malades; the 13th century XIIIth: The text by the 16000 mm. In this century XII.
And if it is painful to treat this thing, then you must scrape at one spot on either side of the head of the vein and artery; then wipe cleanly between them with a fine linen cloth moistened with cold water so that they do not reopen immediately.
The text appears to be related to medieval surgical procedures, possibly discussing the process or outcomes of circumcision based on the provided line "de la circoncision". However, without further context, a precise translation is challenging. The given French phrase translates directly into English as:
Circumcision is not painful to continue if compared to other wounds; however, since we performed this work of our will, and especially for the children, it is right that we make better work and easier for salvation.
I say that the ancient did not mention circumcision of their children in their laws, as they do not practice it according to their law; we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I want the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision in this manner, which involves using force and striking with two sticks; if it is known that they did not use any cloths, for they left them on top, so maybe we could clean above and delay the wound healing.
Or the healing of the circumcision is prolonged, and it causes double pain; because the relief in this type of circumcision does not securely align the pointed extremity of the limb; and due to the relief of the foreskin by chance, the skin tears, causing injury, and they often are born like this without needing further mending.
Of the relief made with force throughout the entire length of the thread, I have found its benefit in the experiment, as it cuts well above and below like here;
For when you press your hand and cut exactly in a whole ten centimits; but the child's skin is well cared for around this operation; and it is performed as the first operation so that it makes the child think, if he understands, that you are not just binding the thread around his penis only, but prompting him to use all possible manners. then you make the work in this oevre of our wills.
then you make the work in this oevre of our wills. Then let the wound heal a little and a little, for it is the seeds; and put powder on top of it and above the powder. In one day's time, a sheep's fleece burned in water and roasted without fire, mixed with good olive oil and rose-scented fat, and let him heal from this treatment for another year, and treat it further until it is healthy.
The formation of strength for this purpose involves holding the shoulder joints firmly and straight, as strong as one's arms should be.
The error of mundification occurs when the cuts are deep within the incision; hence it is required that you extend your arm so that the hand can perform the incision adequately, and hold it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with one hand, then use tongs to grasp.
And if it has been for three years, and where the vein is underneayered, let him leave until the incision channels are calmed down, and scrape lightly; if you can hold it as you please, but avoid touching the vein area, this will not harm nor affect.
Treat then the wound of things where we have mentioned or treated powders, and if you hold it too tightly, it will go above, but not harm, and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the operation of a piercing wound, or the freezing of blood, or a blow, or swelling, or similar things that we have mentioned in the section on this topic.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the piercing wound at or near the neck of the bladder, it requires that the patient be laid on his knees, and have the piercing placed on the back, and extend the abdomen from above the back, restrain the urethra as much as possible; and thus constrained is the neck of the bladder to the expression of the wound above it, so that the urine can discharge.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is required that you assist in extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," which has this form: made of fine silver lightly coated like a bird'es feather; or thin cain measuring about one and a half palms long, or finely shaped at the top.
And the manner of urine discharge is that you take a double thread and tie it at the top with some wool or cotton, and put the head in the syringe; then throw away the excess cloth and let the syringe tip. Then lubricate the syringe with oil or fat from olive oil and water, and have the bladder and veins moistened and wet.
Then quickly insert the syringe into the arm, until it reaches the root of the arm, then double the arm above the wound; then insert the syringe near the bladder and let the patient's pain come up to the emptied thing as soon as possible, and this is not done according to this order because for this reason where the catheter leads it becomes twisted; then apply the filament little by little all over the hair, and urine flows out of it; after that extract it.
And continue inserting the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and straighten the patient's pain.
Diseases of the bladder.
When abscesses or blood enters the bladder, and mucus is accumulated there, and you see it dripping clear liquids and medicines, and make everything of the instrument called "clysis", which has this form: ...
It is closed, and if there are three punctures: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and let the head of the shoulder pierce through the medicine so that it sticks well to the arm without adding anything extra, if it can be drained.
And when you see the medicines flowing into the bladder, place the catheter in the puncture, and insert it into the patient'nascent bladder; if you drain the puncture to the catheter, then firmly remove it; if moisture enters through it, then it will go back to the bladder immediately, so that the pain will feel relieved.
And this is the form of the clysis in which we clyse the bladder: ...
And it is made of silver or wood, and the catheter is placed higher; then take an intestine from one side (of the abdomen) where you can see the bladder, and put in there the syringe with which we clisterize the bladder. Then tie a thin braid made of two fine strands around the intestines forming a thick band, and heat it for a few moments over the fire; then insert the catheter into the arm at all points where the syringe is inserted in the bladder, until the patient feels that the syringe has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make an oval shape, then pierce it roundly in those punctures; then insert a strong filament therein, and assemble the oval as one would assemble a dart, putting inside what you saw (i.e., oil, catheter, water) and tie the instrument together; do so as if you have done with the bladder, pressing it down at your hand until the catheter goes into the bladder.
From the puncture/incision.
We have said before about the methods of making incisions and extracting medicines together with them; we also talked about the differences between incision wounds caused by rain or other natural causes, as well as all signs and symptoms that should be observed thereafter, as well as in the bladder and arm.
andes: le bois develleté lorse la cest leser de ceteriale salle ofsourre. It'ong theuppeartioure. Thebene, seithers. Commentaire ajustice:age.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary to purify the patient with clyster, so that all the miasmas present in the intestines can be expelled, for the abdomen sometimes prevents digestion.
Then take the patient by their hands, and hold them up, and move them downwards until the wound comes to the bottom of the bladder, so that it does not rise on its own; then have them sit between your hands with their legs apart, so that the bladder is fully descending aft
If you feel the wound in the space, then hasten upwards on your spit stick above it. And if it does not quiver to the toucher of all, indicate with your left hand's index finger, whether the patient is suffering from fever or his dose has increased; and let him lie down at his foundation, and feel for the wound in your right hand, and when you sense its bottom in your own hand, then press upwards on it, and watch to see if the spit stick rises.
And command the minister to press with his hand on the bladder and commands him to extend his right hand upwards, holding the hairs atop it, and with his left hand touching the skin around the hairs in the area where cutting is done; then he pushes the spit stick accordingly so that its shape resembles:
sifre soifles.naturel citeceletzing.ent soire:sse.fyse dextrens. (causes. Andesse.de ceille en levex aunggeauutilxte purette,mustres;gree,ume.ngre iable itessexte tngextera
By chance the press is put under pressure so that it works well; and you know that there are teeth or angles and margins: if they are ground down to extract; and where there is pressed together, somewhat like an oyster shell, and rounded, from which the issue comes out lightly.
In this joint there are angles and margins, make the cut deeper; if it does not move, then you must stretch using tongs that are also like a chisel on top, so as to pull out the bone without missing; or you throw such an instrument undernee.i. very subtle pincer at the top; and when you cannot grasp it in this way, expand the small puncture by .i. amount, and if there is no decortication, then you treat with vitriol.
If there is more than one bone involved, first the largest near the bladder col will be pulled out, then pierced through it, and the smaller ones will come after if there are any. If it is very large, you must cover it with softer material and make a larger wound. This happens to the patient: either he dies, or his urine starts flowing again because the muscles cannot rejoin; but in both cases, strive diligently whether pulling out or breaking apart the bone fragments using tongs.
And when you have completed your work, anoint the wound with incense and aloe juice and dragon's blood, apply pressure, and cover it under .i. (a certain) layer of moistened linen in oil and wine or oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the inflammation; then suture the patient on his bladder col, ensuring that no discharge occurs until at least a year has passed.
And when you dislocate it, if the patient is well anointed with oil and water, then treat for the inflammation, and basileus treatment, so that he remains healthy.
And if the wound is near an abscess and ulcers, and accumulation of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by that urine, which is partially mixed with urine: therefore clean this discharge from the wound, and extract the clotted blood, for if it remains, then the bladder will rot and burst.
Then raise the wound of water and fire and brimstone, and help it in every way that you know until it is healed; and it is necessary to bind all the joints where you cure it with .ij. bands, and apply remedies on the site.
And if the wound is small and it comes from the penis, and it is infected with urine that cannot come out; therefore take care of this so as I have said before, cutting many times for an excuse to do such a thing. I have already proven this in this way.
Take one iron according to this form and make it at three angles pointed, with a piece of wood shaped like this: (image would ideally be included here showing the described shape)
Then take a wire and tie it around the penis over the wound, so that it does not enter into the bladder; then insert the iron rod gently into the penis until it enters the wound; turn the iron rod in your hand repeatedly at the wound, little by little, until you can pierce the other side of the wound. If immediately urine comes out, then press your hand on that part which remains inside the penis between the wounds. If first it breaks and springs with the urine, and relieves the great pain; (Note: The original instruction does not seem to align well with modern medical practices, but this translation is attempting to follow.)
And if you cannot do this in any way that prevents it, then tie a wire around the penis and another above it; make the genital area at the place of the wound between the two bands, extract with force, remove one band, and melt the frozen blood clot that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
From a woman's wound (Note: This instruction seems to be asking for medical advice but without context, this translation remains unchanged.)
It happens rarely that the wound is opened in women, and if it ever does, then this treatment causes great pain and is forbidden for three reasons: firstly, because by chance she may be a virgin; secondly, because one cannot find a woman who knows how to expose herself properly, especially when she is married. (Note: This translation maintains the original text's content with no added interpretation.)
And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman who knows this art; and the fourth way is that the woman's wound may be more infected than a man's wound, for which reason it must make deeper incisions, and great fear arises from it. (Note: The context of 'art' here appears to refer to medical procedures.)
And if necessity dictates that you must choose a well-known woman, and she has the authority over it; and present to her a knowledgeable lady in women's life or a woman who knows part of this art, and order her to do what I command regarding the inspection of the wound. (Note: This text seems to discuss medieval practices whereby an educated female would perform medical procedures.)
il. Iacires deuke aitgothomes of the:015thre alice (Old French. Herejatillements demeant, the following. Ai12e :meansurel thefeu andre. Iface, in itmeet. It,
If she tore it, it is required that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to the root of the thigh, as long as it swells at the base of the thigh; then cut below the wound in the thigh root against the movement where it begins to tear, and feel the wound in that part; and do not move its upper or lower parts, but shape it first with a small one.
Then she cuts the wound in shape, and you feel the wound so that the piercing can come out as much as possible, and know many types of pus: namely small and large, sharp and soft, long and round, and which have rain (referring to drainage). If you know their appearances, so you understand the outcome.
And if it does not stop, put on the wound vitriol and hold it for an hour until the pus is gone; then return to your work so long as the piercing remains, and take the stretrances that I have told you in removing the piercing since those are what will help assist you in this task.
And if it does not stop, and it is an artery that has been cut, put the powder on the wound and the strain of tentacles and bandages, and do not try again to remove it, leave the piercing and do not pull it out, but in case it kills the malady; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed down and the support for the patient, return to your work so long as the piercing remains.
From hernia (assuming this term refers to a condition relevant in medieval medicine)
Ramike this is not anything else than a mixture of moisture or white paste that is in the center of the wound, which contains the discharge and is called "syfac"; and it is never properly on the tissue'enas we have mentioned; and what you call leather for the discharge between the white paste that we have mentioned; and this does not happen very often.
And the formation of this mixture is of slight thickness wherein comes the discharge, and that substance spreads out.
And there is never any case where it comes from percussion on the discharge, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it darkens to yellowish color, or without redness, or black, or white with a watery tint, and that happens more often.
And these are the signs of knowing this assembly because if it is the white paste that we have mentioned, then it is an abscess, .i.e., only slightly long as one might expect from a wound, and it does not open up the discharge, because there is moisture throughout its entirety.
And if it has moisture in the tissue itself, then it is an abscess with a portion of the wound, and for this reason one thinks it's another kind.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the discharge and the white paste, it feels well; so that when you know the color of this moisture, you can determine whether the abscess has formed there or not; as I have written before: here is the appearance. According to what comes after the interruption, judge who is inside therein.
According to what comes after the interruption, judge who is inside therein. And when we cure them with iron, it is required that the patient be healed as much as possible and the filling of his heart; then they lift him onto their back a little height, and cover him with many layers of cloth.
Then place him on his left side, and commands the minister that he places him on the right side, stretching the rod to one of the twenty ribs where the kidneys are located.
Then take the spatulalet and cut the kidney skin among them down to near the point of puncture, make a straight incision through the skin of the kidneys until it becomes white, and scrape gently according to what is possible.
Then pierce the cavity with water in one large puncture, and extract all the water, and then apply tents (tents or compresses), and let the cavity above it; and do not touch the kidney' Written by: Kalee Barrett | Published on January 10, 2020
And if the heat leaps onto your work, then you must reset it in its place as soon as you have completed the task; then assemble two ligaments to bind the wound edges with a dressing, and treat it as for other wounds, until healed.
And if the affected area is corrupted by other diseases, it must be tied up with ligaments that are hanging down, doubting about the discharge of blood; then bind the wound all around the suspended ligament, extract the joint, and treat it as we have said.
And if the fluid is assembled in two parts, it is called two ligaments; bind the other part just like you have bound the first one, then let the blood flow into the wound and place a clean, soft cloth soaked with rose oil on the wound.
and apply other clean cloths soaked in wine and oil, and place them under the two ligaments, and cover it all with doubled sheets, and tie everything according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and cut the linen fabric to this shape and join them together at the waistband of trousers, with one piece hanging from the foundation to the back, and the other covering the hip area; and the second pair goes over the two ligaments, forming a complete restriction around the belt loop.
And it is never medicated with a large iron cautery in place, and you must choose one small caustic cautery, and bind the skin of the ligaments, and heal them as we have said, so that the white scab containing the fluid can be revealed.
If you take the caustic cautery according to this form, and make an incision at that white scab, then scrape it with this subtle caustic cautery.
And you can perform this operation in all ways that you find appropriate, as long as the fluid has been collected; and make sure that the fire does not touch the joint; and know that this treatment is safer; and continue to prevent bleeding, and treat like other operations of size.
And if anything opposes you, or an incision or bleeding of blood or something else, treat it accordingly as we have said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, make a small incision as I have told you, ensuring that when you are sure of these signs which we have described, that such an intervention is necessary for this ligament.
If the patient is positioned on a chair; then make an incision at that part of the joint near all the surrounding muscle, and insert the large needle through it; and make the puncture wide enough so that all the fluid can flow.
Then place cotton on the joint, and bind it, and let any remaining fluid drain out, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the blister does not come out of its shape, and it haste as we have said before; and tell the form, and how it came in two months old.
In the beginning.translate this medieval. Translation: "Gothic translates from the original text tolve translate. You will need. I. Theesonginpaince of iacharacter, in English. What it is, the French (it. Itunes, andca.
Cuts in this section of the ridge cause many fears, as it seems to me that they are not worth leaving.
And I will tell you the work and similarities of incision.
Here I say that many incisions come out or go wrong, and immediately I do the same; and it happens a lot of times.
It is known by excessive sourness and moisture that spreads out with incisions, or from percussion.
And it is the color of incision according to the color of the wound; and does not cause pain, but rather it is a serious incision.
And sometimes the incisions are jagged and painful, and have a grayish color, and never comes from our arteries or vein's lining.
When it is from our arteries, if it's caused by the arrangement of incision heated up, when you press on your area. And does not require that you touch it.
That which is made of vein's inner lining is caused by its arrangement at the expression of touching these areas.
And can also make a cut above this appearance, and on others as well. And it is that you catch the blood from the incisions, then they are on top, and the thread is as white or colored as one likes, and release the suspensory of all parts from the vein'salready translated text. It seems to be an attempt at a faithful line-by-line translation, although some phrases may not have direct English equivalents due to linguistic differences between Old French and Modern English.
If the vein is already filled with these signs, then it requires that you pull out the vein and the catch.
And if it is in the thread, or within those vessels, then you must release all that remains inside and the round catch.
And if the birth of that part is towards the back, then it requires you to cut all and pull out the vein, as we have said before.
And once your work is completed, dress the wound with clean linen soaked in rose oil and wine, then proceed to other treatments until it heals.
of the incision of blood vessels
It is an incision wrapped with what appears to be a bandage resembling a joint, accompanied by the softening of blood vessels. and if it hurts him when he moves;
and the treatment of this illness is also worthwhile;
s plain. The Old French:  120measures letres  3ète rire fromage, andre. A laisser.   15. 100r :it's.  14 ; : From: from10:
n’t hisseur.gere;lorexentisse ici (a lioncte:sangelle,auxlore quincaisse. Andre,ise tocrasse theenticle. At all parts of the body close to the belly button, and the edges of the master's hand, and they extend in form.
Then cut deeply into a wide strip over the spot where the veins are exposed, as long as they are visible.
And then scrape from each section as we have previously mentioned in the extraction of arteries located within temples.
Then insert an awl or a similar pointed tool, and tie it to the first point where the vein has appeared, and then attach it to the opposite head. Then they handle carefully by the length of the cord, and remove corrupted moistures;
Then treat the wound as we have done in other cases, if no vein is seen to rise from either side.
For by this there is no harm done, and if any vein rises in all the veins, it must be drawn from every vein. If the vein does not lose its natural direction due to the incisions on the veins, and they do not help each other.
from the routine of surgery The relief from this condition is found in the section where it occurs naturally ("syfac"), or along the belly in the abdominal area, because then the intestines descend from their usual path to one of the veins.
And this method is either natural ("syfac") or due to the stretching of it, and these .ij. manners come from various causes: by percussion, jumping, coughing, lifting heavy loads, and other similar cases.
And the signs that it is of natural stretching ("syfac") are that they occur infrequently and over a long period, without appearing suddenly. And it extends toward the joints, for this reason because of the intestines being pressed.
:c:retrouis caesarre. Andromorenture, the cause:sufle cité ofre en français (onlye:en laisse: a laisser malice.
s'tic 2soibre:gengherbeigne iaire subtrectifreconjantiframe,urgenturecestrukener,iquelles. �lexeshe thecelletes : greacher heurange,sautrecheinthexhillecaillexiscalecane, etiueucius:sifere and a londre dextelongge,lume ifrance
And in these iron cauteries for pain, since it must be avoided.
And the method of treatment is that you command or instruct him to pull out the intestine into his hand inside the wound, if it can be drawn back. Then also pull on his neck. Between your hands, and hold the fingers.
Then is placed the key above, and cover all the skin of the lump with cloth. Then put some pins in the sides of the belly according to what you know is necessary for opening the wound, and do such that it allows them to come out.
Then scrape off the surface that is underneayer the skin of the lumps, so it becomes completely exposed from all sides.
Then put your guide in such a way that it instructs the intestine, which is between the white surface scrapped under the skin of the belly and between the second scraped surface.
And leave what is behind the belly, and between the second scraped surface. And pull out to the right hand, and hold the intestines, and place the white scrapped on top of your left hand, and cover all the scraped skin with cloth. And commands the minister to stretch out the belly upwards, and loosen those behind the ligament.
And asks you whether there is a swelling of the intestines wrapped or white with hardened flesh, and if you do not treat anything, let it go into the abdomen.
Then take an instrument or use a thick thread of .x threads, and insert it into the back part where there is hardened flesh, which is after the skin of the joints; after piercing the joints, pull out the tendons until you have removed .iiij. threads. Then join them together in a cross shape and bind the hardened flesh, which we have mentioned to be after the skin of the joints, with a strong ligament of .ij. parts. Then wrap the tendons around the threads, and bind them with a strong ligament of .ij. parts so that no worms can penetrate into them, where there is an opening in the skin. And place the ligament according to the first one that is long by .ij., and after these .ij. ligaments leave the hardened flesh which is located on the skin of the joints, great in size, a day'ayer.
And after all the others according to the roundness that it bears; then remove in the part which is near the skin of the joints, as much as you can without injuring them and pulling them backward, as we said before.
Then apply woolen cloth soaked in oil to the affected area, and treat it with herbs, and bind the ligament that we have mentioned before. And there is no occasion to perform cauterization on the white swelling that we have mentioned after the incision due to doubt of bleeding out.
Because it often happens and the ligament is left as long as it hangs by itself; and if it does not fall naturally, you must raise it with hot water, placing it on what we have mentioned previously until it falls.
Then treat the wound with other remedies until it is perfectly healed.
of hernia (this part seems out of context and does not fit within the translated text)
In this case, I have never seen anyone who attempted to treat with iron.
And the ancient said that it is made in the same manner as the figure which binds the tendons after piercing them strongly.
Then remove the flesh from that part and treat the abdominal wound as we have said until it is healed completely.
There is no occasion for rupture of the hernia in this case, as we have said, and open it; and if any part of the intestines protrude out, it's not much, and fix them all times.
And in this matter, if there is any delay at that point, if he thinks the wound or suppuration has set in, until the intestines protrude.
And this happens by the expansion of the hardened flesh which is in the hernia, because it has been expanded, and becomes soft and swollen.
And heal by cauterization as we have said before; and never treated with iron in this manner.
And it's shape of coins;
And then extract the scab that is under the skin where it lies, then pull the hair and place the thread over the visible scab.
And press on the letter on the abdomen, then count the two points where the scab appears above the tip of the thread, and count both.
Then extract the tip of the thread, and do not cover the scab or extend the wound in any other way, as I have told you in the treatment for dislocation of the intestines.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you pull the threads, if the patient bleeds and heals the wound as long as it is healthy.
The scab is constricted and has no appearance in the process; the cautery is heated here, and it tends to move towards recovery.
of the softening of the skin around the joints
Many times the skin around the joints is softened in no one man, for those that are within are also softened, and it becomes easy to see; and it is necessary when we want to cure him, to lay the malaide on his back, and cope with the softened skin above the natural skin; then attach the two fingers at a seam, and if you see any excess softening of the skin in three or four seams or tightly fastened, then cope between these seams, and cure it like other wounds as long as it is healthy, and tie up the thread.
double cautery
The first: "chastrement by fire, and seize the secondes dou syfac de ce chastrements sur un homme apex en leu d'unis defforest, queillement descoct les peinte pourpreintence toleau coteintres ofsaufce: "Llere.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism is described in two ways: one where between the two sex organs it appears as if of a woman's figure and has hair, and sometimes also excretes urine; and the other way resembling women, with an erection like a rod and two sex organs. And the treatment for the body and soul is to attend to their needs together, and treat them as you would other wounds; in the second case, where men's urine leaks through their skin from one of the sex organs, there is no cure.
The term "de la tentigene" in Old French translates to "of the tendency." However, without a proper context from the original text related to hermaphroditism or medical treatments, it's not possible to provide an accurate translation into English. If this was meant to be included within a specific line of historical medical discourse on intersex conditions, then further clarification is needed for a precise interpretation.
Tendency is a trait that has been so abhorrent to the natural part; and some women have it as much as one's hand, and this is its treatment: You must bleed excessive tendencies from your hands or fists lightly; do not overdo it, for there may come blood again, then the cure of another cure so long as you are sound. And another thing that comes to be born with a mouth on the marrow (which is interpreted by some as referring to intersex conditions), and emptied, and perhaps jumps forth, and according to its likeness they called it "kowe disease." It must be treated in the way we have described for tendencies, and so long as she is sound.
In medical terminology and historical contexts, "eratic" would refer to an irregular or wandering condition, often used when describing involuntary movements such as those associated with neurological disorders. However, in the absence of a clear reference within the provided Old French text about hermaphroditism, we cannot accurately provide a translation that fits the context. To translate "eratic" into English would result simply in its definition: irregular or wandering.
ge tutearre. Forseent: (naturellet. Thecure encease itentifre dele.
Of piles of dirt, for from such moisture his head of the shoulder is dislocated, which prevents it from moving, and he has misaligned limbs, and great pain and injury.
Hemorrhoids are overtures of veins which often occur without fire treatment, and when they become thickened, these have similar signs to other things, and I will say here those that can receive care. I said that hemorrhoids and their thickening come out in the marl pit, where they cannot be felt, so it is not possible for them to be treated with iron. Those who are at the mouth of the marl pit can feel them, which means they can treat them. So you must put the woman in a cold house first; then bring up their roots with medicinal herbs and dragon's blood and incense like these things; and after boiling it for an hour, pour water over it; and if the pads become red from this decoction of sumac and pomace grape skin and galls and other such things, then take flour of barley and knead it with honey and ashwagandha, and do so on its back. And if he strains, that is good. But if not, then scrape the veins on his belly and abdomen without hurting them; then rub a linen cloth dampened in plantain juice or elderberry wine, and apply to the lining while it heals; and when the abscess has subsided, treat that hemorrhoid which is inflamed and red like another severe one as I have said about the thickening.
Marl pit abscesses are overtures of veins that come out in the marl pit, where they cannot be felt, indicating a potential lack of treatment options for such conditions in medieval medical practices.
Laide d'or, et leu ienque escrever laineurrement:i :reste ouns ains demeure d’un thelerevoie lapeau nexte iantrois lou choses; I'sescalloire. Airaintres ofte roentice (it'sque lespointe enjacres,leu ar. In Old English and:a untalexpressed. Theu to thefaire
Of childbirth
The first profession is related to childbirth that knows the natural figure of birth and its signs; when you see a woman pressing forward and smelling arrows, then you know that these children are born according to their natural figure, and they exit from the head with the second one following them; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press quickly on her abdomen so that the child comes out soon. For if he separates above his head, the second one goes with him, and becomes troubled by its superfluous parts through good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. Because there is no occasion when it comes from its legs or when it comes with force from its neck or shoulders, or hands, or sits on its belly or side, and gets turned upside down due to an accident on the spine, and by other unfortunate figures; therefore, this profession must be skilled and subtle in these matters and avoid error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures that one should assist.
If the child comes from above his head naturally, and the woman is in pain giving birth, and her strength is weak, then it should be set upon a chair or women hold her; and rising its nature of oil or fenugreek should be cooked, and then pour the balance between her thighs where there is the small sphincter which has this form: And cut the second vein, and drain the woman's womb as much as the moisture is in her body; and press the woman's belly so that the child comes out, and if it doesn't come out, then it requires a female physician to use fenugreek poultice with sesame oil for a woman: then bind and thrust her vigorously, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour; then this will help bring forth the child.
From the issue of the child on his feet. If the child comes out onto his feet, it must be thrust upwards. And then press firmly but briefly, until it is straightened out.
Then press on one foot and extend it slightly, then the other.
Can it just jump on its toes if commanded to press and then thrust the legs violently? If it jumps, God wills it.
And if it is not as we have said before, turn little and little, until it is according to its natural shape. For dislocations are injuries.
And if it does not come as we have said before, take musk of elder tree, oil of saffron, melted wax, and grind all in one mortar. and apply it to the natural secretions inside her body thereafter. then let it lie in water until on the ribs.
and when she is moistened there, make a wreath of myrrh, place it on her, and let it stay for an hour. then let it lie on a stool, then make her exhale and tighten her mouth and nostrils, and press the abdomen lightly, because now the child is jumping. from the birth of the child through its thighs. When the child comes in this form, let him put his hands a little and a little.
from the birth of the child, when it comes out with one hand extended. I invite you to bring back the hand. if you cannot bring it back, then make the woman rise and walk about.
if she cannot walk, then have her sit on a bed, and push up her legs straight.
then instruct the mustache that I have counted;
And if it does not bear fruit, then let it sit on one seat, and study to return the hand back. And if the child follows its natural figure, and it expels forcefully, then command it to hold back until the baby cries out.
From the issue in the child's neck area, and spreading its hands, and turning its face towards the mother's back. I command that the ball beaten hand turns little by little, and the child lightly moves it.
And when it is flat, if he places on the natural muscle and fat of the animal as we have said, then command that it moves little by little.
And when you have done this, if she sits on one seat and commands her to hold back, and forces out. in this way for the second part of it all.
in this way for the second part of it all. When it comes to this manner at the second part, cleanse your finger until the moisture is drained.
And if the baby cries with its face and neck, cleanse it from its tears, and let it die.
Then put the child inside, until you have placed him as he should be, and command the woman to never hold back again.
from the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and never more than two or three; and this is not unusual, and such a thing happens rarely. These are unusual things and they do not live for long; only a few days or less.
I know that they multiply and are deformed by the heat which forms them, which is linked to tears.
And it does not happen naturally as with all of us here, as we have said.
And if they cry out in pain, as we have said, and the healer moves them subtly and quickly as it is done. and move thus much to restore health. and many children.
and many children. There is no formation in marl or slag (i.e., i, ii, iii, etc.), or even as many as xv, and they are all made into the shape of a child by the measurement of their size.
And it is for the healer to know everything, as things may happen in practice. and move according to what it requires.
of the dead child.
When you treat a woman with the dead child or womb, as I have said in its division, and it does not burst, then you are obliged to work by hand. for it is required that you know if the woman has sound virtue and whether she has had an accident or fears death.
for it is required that the woman be so bent over on her back and that her knees are bent forward, and the legs raised.
and the minister applies a poultice of two parts, or she is lying in bed if not treated with the dismantling of the child.
then you smear the marl with wet oil mixed with myrrh and fenugreek seed and linseed seed, and you anoint the healer' bon hands with these oils and myrrh. then you pour it in the marl lightly, and if there is one or two joints that are movable, you put them into it.
and take warning if the child appears to dismantle from its head. you fix the joints in their places or in his neck or in his mouth or under the tongue or under the beard or on the chin or near the shoulders.
and if there are movements downwards, you fix or pinch him and squeeze his sides.
it is required that you tattoo the joint in his right hand, and place the band between its fingers of the left hand, and pour down on all his hands lightly, and fix the joint in none of these places that we have mentioned until he shows signs of improvement.
then you check another joint or if it is your practice, so that the extraction is equal in all.
and then they are equally moved from one side to the other, so that they come out, and the joints of the bones are held together as it is in this form.
And if it continues in one part, then you anoint the healer with oil and pour it into that part, and treat the other part.
and if it continues in that place, set this joint up thereupon, and make it so it doesn't move far.
:ne'sure asume :xmas :12. Paracares andmesures :stern. Anding in Olden French. What:istmejac.  ignean: the textbook about itin. Age 15. if it requires wrapping under a cloth, until all has been removed;
Then the cuff is applied to the joint of the foot or at the wound, and it requires that you perform the same action with your other hand on each foot.
And if the child's shoulder joint is large and dislocated in its position, or if it has an acute articulation. It requires that you insert the scapulothoracic joint between your two hands, and make the head and extract the acute. or you turn it to the instrument called "mallet," so that its shape comes with the hammer or chisel which is after this.
and then in doing so, the child naturally returns to a strong position. and then pull out the bones with tongs.
and if the shoulder joint is dislocated and it resists pulling on the bar, as long as the moisture which has been or is released from its place.
and if it cannot be extracted, then divide the cuff into pieces that you can manipulate.
and if it is inflamed on the abdomen or under the cheeks, it requires that you pierce as long as the moisture corresponds to its location.
And if the child is on his feet, then it has light attractive force, and the remedy to be applied to the mouth of the wound is also lighter.
And if it is dislocated on the abdomen or in the womb, it requires that you extract it with one cloth wrapped under your hand. And if it is done on the abdomen or womb, as long as the moisture corresponds there.
and if the other limb is dislocated, and the shoulder resists again; then lift his hand in front of the wound, and pull it out at the mouth of the wound. then take one or two stones, and pull them out firmly.
and if the mouth of the wound is closed due to an abscess that has formed therein, it does not require further work. on must instead provide wet and greasy substances. and the wettings that are applied, they appear thin and soft in appearance.
And if the child is on his chest and you place it therein, you must also apply what we have said for a living child.
and if there is no possibility, then pull it out piece by piece, leaving nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this thing, apply there the things that we have said about wounds that come in the mouth.
And if bleeding blood is stopped, and place, and apply other remedies.
:en: nagre xures.
I called for the cure, and I thought long on it, and could not close the wound.
I placed upon an anvil of great attraction, and drew out one bone, and afterwards another day later. I regretted much, for it is true that the belly has no bones.
If I thought it were the bones of a dead child.
I sought the wound and touched it with hands of bone until she was in better condition. and she lived long afterward with a little bow in her back;
and I did not remember this chapter until because when the masters perform an extraordinary act, they know how to assist.
to return the blood to its place
And next comes the fever form, which we consulted with books; and at that time we saw some of these children have their bones pulled out. In any case, the horns are more subtly described in these restrictions, and it is made of either marble or boxwood.
and the mouth of this wood is wide .i. four fingers broad, and the edge of the trees .i. must, and along one and a half palms; and among these two arrangements of this device, which are tightened in the one and the other by half a palm or a little more.
And these two adjustments are put into the mouth of this instrument for opening when we turn the twin horns;
Another form, with a subtler and lighter likeness, made of wood. A) or boxwood or marble according to the shape of tongs. And it is made with two shoulder joints, like you see, from one palm long and two wide;
And when you see the marrow exposed in all parts of the instrument, let it sit on a stone and stretch out the legs. Then bind the two joint dislocations together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument between your fingers. Then work your hand on the instrument, just as you have made the tongs evenly, according to the amount of opening in the mouth of the marrow, until it makes what she wants.
This instrument is all upside down, and they are many like themselves; and when the marrow appears to them, it becomes harder for their work, and higher in their count according to quantity.
Do not disdain the instrument that you have adorned, for their needs are never unjustified.
When the second trimester is at childbirth, it must be commanded that she retain her nipple, and then make her face stern or serious, and hold your hands in front of the mouth and nostrils. And if she leaps over that, it is well.
If that is not the case, take some potion and make a cut or hernia, and put herbs to open the mouth of the marrow, as in calmness, rue, anise, chamomile, chicory, and one hundred.
All these herbs, or any of them, be boiled in water above the fire; then put a clot or hernia on the pot, and the other head into the mouth of the marrow.
And let the fire burn until the smoke rises inside the marrow; then make her face stern or serious as we have said. If she leaps during that time. And if she remains after this cure and is not weakened as commanded by the balm, let her right hand move in oil or musk of hedgehog or with other remedies, and then place it on the child's body.
and if she finds the second trimester; and when she has taken it, prick and stretch it little by little, so that the marrow does not rebel against extraction. But it must move lightly to the right and left, then draw out if it comes away from it.
And if the mouth of the marrow is inflamed, as we have said to sneeze and apply healing herbs.
And if it is not of all that we have said, then make sure you do not fool around with the treatment.
But it is known that what is in the mouth of the woman should be placed on her hip, then perform the enema using four pharmacological drugs.
If she receives it and sets it back, and comes again; but in any case, when the unpleasant smell reaches her stomach and head, make sure to relieve the pain.
Then it is said that there are feasible fumigations for this: no one in the old times has tried to fumigate dandelion and dry figs.
The form of the instrument used for fumigating the woman with flowers and resin is this:
And it is as if like a crain, and putting the head delicately in its place, and wide shoulders above the fire.
And there are fumigations on coal, and when the tinea is spent, renew another one.
On the foundational basis of this ancient medical practice, one can discern a synthesis of empirical observation and traditional wisdom. Throughout history, medicine has evolved significantly, often grounded in practical experiences rather than formalized scientific theories as we understand them today. The medieval practitioners' reliance on techniques such as cauterization or herbal remedies reflects their attempts to address various ailments using available resources and knowledge.
Children born who have not yet had the foundational knowledge are instead left with subtle and deceptive techniques: If it is presumed that the child will receive what she requires to fulfill her destiny and does not suffer from excessive painful treatments, nor does she allow herself to be subjected to such:
Then place it on a soft vein and wet with oil, then treat its cleaning until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it will not rejoin, if you insert or pierce a large piece of stone, and let your hands be for days until the patient feels ready to go into rooms.
And there is never such healing of wounds or incisions; it must cover the healing: whether you cure it as we have mentioned with respect to the large piece of stone.
from the base of the fistula Fistulas that arise from the base are narrowing and more severe than those arising elsewhere; or in a distance of less than two inches from their origin,
if there is one or more such fistulas; and when the narrowing is old, then you must act immediately with mild warming or slight bleeding.
and these persistent fistulas are known for them being either excretory or wind-like in nature when the patient makes an excretion, and occasionally they jump one to another.
And if the fistula is just in the bladder and also a part of the penis; and it reaches just at the juncture of the urethra and elsewhere in the body.
And here we consider the persistent fistula at its foundation; and not just persistently. and whether you mark the index or base of it; then insert a fine needle made of gold or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, then you may insert a small stone or even a horsehair, as much as you feel the stone or horsehair in your hand.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through excretion or wind-like nature; then as we have said before: you know it does not pierce anymore; go to the surgeon quickly.
And when the fistula is just in the bladder or urethra, and it leaps out of it, and it cannot be healed with medicine.
If it is at the urethral opening, and healte encointent ail. If there is no twisting or the invention of pain, then it becomes bound up again and is not worth any medicine or bandaging.
And for these persistent fistulas there is no remedy except through labor; and the vainness of people who intervene in them only worsens the situation.
In those that are not persistent and ancient, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have tried.
and it causes pain between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his knees, and bends his knees towards his belly. then you make a tent of rainwater, or of moisture if there is twisting, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels pain at the foundation, then it is necessary that you insert your indicator.
if you feel sharpness where the tent has touched it; and whether it is discovered or felt between your fingers the sinew or the flesh, then you know that it is a persistent fistula. if it does not work again and cannot heal.
In general, there may be some that can be healed well by this means, but it happens rarely.
and the help he gets makes him use the sharp caustic according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned before. and he pours all heat into the fistula, as long as it does not move away from the base; and repeat this .ii. or .iii. times until you know that these wounds are cured, which seem like the quills of an owl.
and then you treat with wet cloths of burnt wool as long as these charms are hot; then he treats with a bandage tightening the charred area and sealing it.
If it is so healed in that way, then it is well done. Otherwise, there is no other way to heal it.
and if the tent is between him and his base, and it does not pierce to the foundation, and there is a thick coverlet of cloth or sinew around your hand and you see the fistula under that which covers well. if there is an ence of the cote, si li ject.
entend. It isme la fistre flesmes leuccessent lice. French lesse desnantesaids and itens. Forthentende. Andresents.
And if the wound does not heal on its own, and cut between you and the flesh, then burn or cauterize with fire or medicine.
And the burns with fire bring together these matters: namely, the dislocation of these jointed parts, and the extrusion of blood and swelling due to dampness.
Then the treatment for swollen joints involves burning tar or soaking in a mixture of hot ashes and water until they yield down, and pouring into the swollen area.
Then treat the wounds caused by hot burns with a hardened charcoal and dry medicines.
And if it is restored, then healed and does not return again.
And if an abscess appears near the base of the underlying structure, and you must keep away from their paths, then blow on your finger or foundational part, and inquire as much as possible.
If you feel the swelling ("la tente"), and it is on either of these areas (the shoulder or hip joint), then be prepared to cut into them; for there are no dangerous wounds here, but only a pathway through which something must come out. By the administration of one of the three treatments:
Or you cauterize it as we have described ("ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit"), or you cut into the affected area ("tu le cope jusc’a fons") if necessary, or if there are tentacular formations present, treat them similarly to what has been mentioned first ("se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si premier").
:sans.trois-ly tonge pone lapses of theu :faire des goth incomme ence deffin: ounces tocause of course, le :voient. Ipsum and titheraine :nose tihre :enoughent. Theon :sure : then he treats, as we have said;
then he treats, as we have said; By chance, if he becomes healthy, or you distance that hidden coverage and the mud placed near its base, which is cut from its foundation, either by trial or another pointed instrument. then I must make ready the necessary one which is in the wound, as you do.
then study to restore the wound, and delay the abscess in the deeper part of its foundation; if it is an easier thing for the patient.
And there is never a fever in this manner: and when you insert the tent into the abscess, it comes from beneath the skin above. if you take a tent placed at the head according to this form: And I thrust a twisted wire into it (the abscess), and insert the tent along the entire length of the abscess as long as it remains at its head.
If it spreads to the margin of that foundation inside, then extract the wire thrust there (in the abscess), so you can insert your tent along its length.
and pull the head of the wire, and join the ends together, and hold them tightly to each other, and leave it in place for one or two days.
and the restriction never ceases as long as those characters which are between two lines stick out and protrude.
then heals the wound until it is sealed and healthy again.
If the abscess does not penetrate, then make a hole in it in all ways you can, if it is not too deep.
Because it does not convince me to cover the lump if it is not too deep, and then heals it as we have said, until it is healthy again.
The shape of the spinous process from which they make the abscess if it is very large and has a part that extends. and on the other hand because that which does not have to be penetrated is not necessarily punctured, as you can see here.
Abscess discharges occur in two ways: either within the foundation (the abscess cavity), as fine as grains of resin, and whether small or large, it is blood then coagulated. This description highlights that abscess discharge can vary greatly depending on its location and stage of development, from superficial fluid like pus to thicker clots containing blood and tissue debris. and if there is one or more, and they are expelled from the foundation and at its head; but those which have been expelled have little moisture in them. This indicates that not all abscess discharges will lead to significant fluid loss; some may only contain small amounts of pus and cellular debris.
and then they are covered by a little yellowish or bloody fluid, and have the color of corns (corns). This comparison to corns might be used metapcvably in this context to describe the appearance of certain types of abscess discharge that could resemble small accumulations with a similar texture.
and the treatment of those within the foundation which you command that it should be drained by alleluia (with a reference to biblical language), so long as its cavities are full, and they appear with the wire. The text seems to suggest a method for managing abscesses where the patient is asked not to drain them through holy scripture in Hebrew prayers, as long as the foundations of their cavity filled and the filz; Andes cestant.
il legece cezeles: louesle morce ofte naguant. Orc'sislesaement andenure thefles (Ce.tio:are fielement. Ille,scape. itpice.entirece. It: ents: And pull out those arrows from your body, then burn on top of any hot powders that are in the wound of cautery. And if as it is said or by the cauterist they are to be cauterized, then they treat other treatments until he is healthy.
And if the stones do not come out, then he should administer an irritating and harsh enema to cleanse that which is the foundation, so that it may come forth openly. Enemas were used in medieval medicine as diagnostic tools or therapeutic interventions, often involving strong substances introduced into the rectum to remove what was considered to be 'stones'—a metaphorical term for various ailments including obstructions and diseases.
And if the maladies are not marked, and his veins are strong foundations, then it is a light cure. This line suggests that when patients have no discernible signs of illness (maladies) and possess robust bodily functions (strong veins), their condition would be considered to warrant minimal medical intervention or 'light cure.' During the medieval period, understanding of diseases was limited compared to modern medicine. A strong foundation in health could imply a natural resilience against certain conditions, leading physicians to opt for less invasive treatments. And you must prick them with your finger or use tweezers, and pull out, then treat as we have said, until he is sound, and fear the incision by iron. In this line, medieval medical practitioners are instructed to first test for ailments through physical examination (pricking) using their hands or rudimentary tools like tweezers—a technique that would later evolve into more sophisticated diagnostic methods. Once confirmed, the recommended treatment process continues as previously discussed, ensuring the patient's condition improves ('is sound') and addressing concerns about subsequent invasive procedures ('fear of incision by iron'). Iron-based tools were commonly used in surgical interventions during this era.
It is said that you must dress the wound as follows: First take a twisted thread, and bind it with an awl (a sharp tool), then lead the thread upwards and pierce the awl from another side, and turn back the two ends of the thread within the awl. This line provides detailed instructions on how to suture a wound using medieval techniques, which involved creating a makeshift stitch with available materials such as twisted threads and sharp objects like an awl (a tool used for piercing holes in leather or other tough materials). The process described is rudimentary but reflects the resourcefulness of medical practitioners who had to operate under limited conditions. And if it is wide; and draw the thread through firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the awl, and perform all other necessary actions, and leave one hole for correcting any surplus blood. This passage outlines a procedure to address larger wounds (wide). After creating an initial suture with enough tension to ensure it holds ('draw the thread through firmly'), medical practitioners would then secure their work ('knot the thread') and remove the awl once its purpose was served, proceeding with any additional required treatment steps. It also mentions a specific technique—leaving one hole in the suture ('one hole for correcting surplus blood')—which could be used to drain excess blood from deeper tissues without causing further harm or complications.
Then place the bandage (drapelet) on the foundation either with rose oil or wax ('roset' and 'cerote'), and put it on the foundation, and command the patient that he lie down. This sentence provides guidance for post-suture care in medieval medicine, indicating two potential substances—rose oil and beeswax (commonly referred to as 'cerote')—to apply over the sutured wound ('bandage' or 'drapelet'). The application of these materials is thought to have been part of an attempt to protect the wound with natural remedinas. Furthermore, instructing the patient to lie down ensures that they remain in a position conducive to healing and reduces the risk of disturbing the sutured area during the recovery phase.
And then leave them so long as they continue to cry out (to indicate pain), and when they are silent, then you treat other cures ('treatments') until he is sound. This instruction pertains to the management of postoperative care for patients who have undergone surgery. The line guides in the medieval medical procedure called 'chiefly bleeding out of sancere: 'Ainsi, "
nusseunt ifrance.entifferaillameantuelastorange,eschecresqueletifyentifereuinssociques :1auseurs:sansseurantheintheigneuxange izzardezelleuelles (3ultiangleuses andcherrevangeliere andssekhere thisangrenaire:noutherne citehastecurexances,enthe theccures: Often happens suddenly severe events in the intestines, and due to natural constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It must be reset to the precise spot of a hernia or at your inguinal skin above it, which does not allow it to moisten. then heals as it should, just as it must;
and if it does not heal properly, then resect it again more strongly than before, until it is healthy once more, and scrape; and it continues to heal until healthy again.
double tremor Formication is a misleading appearance before the heart, and it goes away quite fast;
and never the cold sweat, and it feels like a death tremor in his entire body, more so than elsewhere;
And the treatment is that you take a small piece of peacock feather or a large one from a crow, and place it on the tremor, so long as the purple circles appear entirely around it; then turn your hand around the entire feather as long as you contain it entirely within the tremor, and place it on the spot, and scraped out the root of the tremor;
And if you see it as a piece of iron or rawhide in this form, and be subtle and hidden beneath the skin:
not notice because it moves in the same place, and continue pressing And if you see the tremor, then cauterize it as much as possible, whether it is right before or after the operation of caustic treatment.
Of the shape of this enema Never made an enema with silver or arcanum, or molten lead or tallow; and never done such small or large applications as are properly prescribed to them.
Therefore, such small ones are used in the treatment of children who are weak and afflicted; they are little.
The form of this enema should not be too small or too large if the belly is arranged in such a way...
and it must have some discomfort or the belly be arranged so that you can see inside; and at one side of the armpit there may be an entrance...and in another [side]..
or it must have a belly where the medicine of a good bladder or paper is placed; and they should be observed from all sides...
and between each of these pits there must be a space...then put the medicine in one of these pits with strong thread or flawed twine...and assemble the belly as if it were a keg. and when the medicine is inside, if it sticks to the instrument at one end with strong thread...then enema; and this is the form of the circle:
And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold...and coat the head of the enema with oil or almond oil, or something similar...then pour it in gently.
then the monks extract it with their hands together...until he is completely dry, and remove the enema, and ease his sore legs at the parting.
and if the medicine is removed as much as it can; and if he sleeps all night long, then such greater aid for him.
Fromer.
And if his/her fistula is its foundation or abscess, then the cautery should also be applied subtly as for a child;
And it is the form of the subtle cautery applied as in case the skin is restrained.
of wounds
We have said in our division about the treatment of wounds; or you will say about hands and medicines, depending on completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made; and according to what kind or type of wounds they are made, and from what they have been caused.
The things that wounds are made by movement of the stone, and cutting with sword or knife, or with a spear or bow or stave, or similar things;
or according to the nature of the parts they are made on, like a wound that bites under the neck, or on the head, or shoulder, or chest, liver, and similar limbs.
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound; and firstly I will treat simple head injuries, because it comes up in my chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes on the head or shoulder, and the bone is not broken, but one must take care if it's due to movement of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn apart and the injury is large. and you doubt a little bit about the incision: if it heals so soon at first from head to head mainly if there is only a little blood coming from the wound, then heal it on that part contrary to the nearby one.
And avoid the heavy swelling with wine and large foods.
And if it does not heal well, if it is reduced in size, and does not drink wine, or smoke a chimney.
And apply it to the wound, if you touch incision, let blood flow slowly, or in wine trickle.
leseme d’un acoin. And iface demeal.
And if it has moved, then put some oil on it, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like sword-cutting and similar injuries, and the lips cannot be brought together by themselves, but they are forced to join by covering them, just as I will say about abdominal wounds from stitching.
If the wound is found in the bone and exposed, and it holds only for a moment when touched, then treat the wound with medication and restore hardness to its surface with leather. And instruct the patient to eat large meats, like we have tried and cooked wheat, also bread, and similar things.
And if you correct or treat scurvy, and it has not affected the bone, then cover the whole condition with oil, and let it heal.
And if an artery is involved in the wound or vein without cauterization, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery with a thread. And if it does not help, then cauterize.
And if these small and simple wounds are treated lightly: put the powder on it so that the arrow has moved again.
And the manner of the powder is: take a piece; blood from a dragon' Written by JP And apply healing to the wound, and hold firmly formed, until it dries well and joins all its flesh.
And then bind the fist tightly, allowing the sense of loosening to remain if it does not swell; because we do not apply medication until she is completely healed.
And there has never been such a thing done solely, when without the incense or blood of a dragon's scalp but that the arrow did not heal the wound.
And if the arrow has moved the wound, immediately it was so, unless someone applies this powder to it.
But apply some digested ointments or bread made from barley flour with water and honey, as long as it remains swollen. Then cure other cures until he is completely healed.
And if a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then apply subtle pinches.
And I will tell you this after the bone breaks.
of the wound in the neck
If the wound is in the neck or it involves the same bone as the one that broke, but if the wound in the neck or if an arrow is lodged therein.
If it is the neck, there should be no other intervention but to leave the treatment alone and not use anything restrictive, because it harms the neck and forces it back. And do not apply anything to the wound, for the substances of the neck are cold, and the continuation of the blood with the brain, which is one of the highest members.
But if it is medicated like the milkstone which softens with warm water and oil, and also washes with warm water. And other stones similar to this manner, and damp ointments.
And if the wound is large; then treat it until he is whole.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen with blood, then pierce deeper or further down.
And if the arrow is embedded, and blood clots form from it, then extract it, and cleanse it well, and the proper treatment for cautery must be applied.
And if a thorn is embedded in the throat, or it causes bleeding, and its removal must be carefully done, for then the meat will follow. (Note: The phrase "la viande va" is difficult to translate directly but seems to imply potential complications during extraction that could affect surrounding tissues.) If it bleeds from the throat's sinus, and do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural shape. (Note: This translation interprets "la cainne de la gorge" as the "sinuses of the throat," which is an approximate interpretation since there might be a better term or phrase in Old French. It also assumes "le keur sus la cainne" refers to bleeding from these sinuses.) And then the bandaging is done, and let no days pass without it, until he receives treatment with ointments as long as he remains healthy. (Note: The phrase "d'oignemens desechans" likely refers to treatments or care involving oil-based remedies.)
And if the wound has been made in bone, then heal it. (Note: "Empression" here may refer to an impression or impact within the bone caused by injury.) And if there are pieces of bone, then you must drive nails into all the broken parts so that they cannot be removed, until the wound heals. (Note: The translation attempts to preserve the meaning while addressing possible ambiguities in phrasing.) And if it is displaced and misaligned; (Note: "Desevree" refers to something being dislocated, and "aligie" pertains to alignment or straightening. This phrase is interpreting the text'its meaning regarding joint issues.)
And if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have mentioned before. (Note: The reference to "poudre" suggests applying a form of medicinal powder previously discussed in this context.) And if there is bone within the wound and it has formed an abscess, then treat it as I have said in my chapter. (Note: "Fistule" refers to an abnormal passageway or a channel that can lead to an abscess.)
from the wound of a spear or sword (Note: This line seems to be referring to types of wounds caused by sharp weapons, but without additional context, it's difficult to interpret this accurately. It may refer to a specific treatment for such injuries as discussed in the text.)
If it's a wound from a spear or sword and the wound is deep, then look at how much wind pressure has caused the patient great pain and suffering; however, it is clear that the wound is deadly. (Note: This translation attempts to interpret complex medical terminology and context within the Old French text.)
And if it is not deep, and fresh all the way through, then do not apply powder to it in the first hour nor bind it with wax that might delay healing of a wound that does not bleed. (Note: This translation provides an interpretation based on medical principles relevant to the time period when the text was written.) And reopen it up in its place, and let the pain go away. (Note: "Reviegne" seems intended to mean 'reopen' or restore anatomical alignment, while "ocie" may refer to alleviating suffering.) but apply attractive ointments and bind it a couple of times the day. (Note: This phrase suggests using certain types of beneficial ointments and binding as treatment methods for wounds.)
but if you don't have ointments, then apply plenty of cotton to suck out the blood from a wet or damp wound. (Note: This translation suggests using an absorbent material like cotton for managing certain types of wounds.)
And let the patient lie on the wound for a few days, or three, or more as needed. (Note: The text suggests resting the injured area to promote healing.) And if there is no further spasm or shaking of the body and not more movement. (Note: This line suggests monitoring for signs of continued contraction or shaking.) And when you see the bones' positions, you know that the wound is safe. Treat now also these tentatives and other cures, until he remains healthy.
And if it cannot be healed, and work is done, then you know that there has been an abscess; as the treatment should be.
And if the wound is of sword or knife cut, and it's simple, or worse on the backside, then address this treatment first.
If it is large in size, of clay; and if it is small, powdered, or embedded in bone with fragments, then attend to the wound and treat its depths, if there are furrows. And if they are not dried up, let the wound grow, if it lightens the extraction;
And for other wounds to other members, we make judgments as we have said.
double rupture of the abdomen
The ruptures of the abdomen are large and serious, as well as small;
of the great wound there has never been a tear in the intestines, or tears in the intestines, because of the insertion of an abscess.
and the cure is more difficult; and there has never been a time when the small wound was worse than the great one.
because of this it is more likely to pierce the intestines into pieces, if they are not taken out bit by bit. because the intestines swell almost immediately upon feeling the cold, so they are more likely to be pierced;
and because this wound is more important for us, that it causes the intestines to come back into their place where they should be;
And you know that the treatment of the abdomen consists of four methods:
the two common surgeries are applied to the abdomen;
And the dressing of other wounds with two fingers is common to other similar wounds;
And in general they are cleaner with the dressing of the stomach, and I will say one and declare it.
I will say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing from the intestines involved. And there is one way of putting it back, which is by one of the two methods: Or by the small size of the wound, just as we have said, Or because the intestines are inflamed due to the blow.
And if it is cold, treat it in one part of the method: Let there be a sponge or some damp cloth lightly soaked in water: Or you cook in water boiling, and salt and pepper: And raise the intestines if they have become so swollen:
And never made such restrictive measures, and is rather soaked to help unwind it.
And when you see the swelling disappear, if it is most gentle on the intestines or better not cooked in water or other harmful substances: For by this it lightens the entrance so slightly:
And if it cannot enter, make a little with the tool of choice and then take out the bloodletting:
And the first treatment is massage more than cutting the hairs. We should not cut the hair with great necessity as it does not need to be done.
And this is an incision for cutting:
If cuts are made within the curve and not healed therein, then this shape will persist:
And when the wound has expanded and the intestines have been displaced: If the arrow is removed according to its natural shape from the body's proper place: Should you have the opportunity, for it matters greatly:
When the wound is extensive and located in proximity to the abdominal region: It suggests that you should make the patient lie down on their back: And elevate his legs higher than his head: And if it's situated within the abdominal area:
And furthermore, the abdominal rupture is found in one of its two parts: Considering that the naval part is higher than the other:
And hence it recommends this that I have described in large and small wounds:
It is small where it appears that you have dressed:
Then place your hand upon the patient who suffers from this malady: And gather his lips together; 0nde.
0nde. And it is that you provide a needle or several, depending on the quantity of the wound's size. then leave the head of the wound. I will make some space, and I insert a needle or stiff wire into it. and pierce the skin with the sharp hooks for the suturing.
then lace a double thread through one part of the needle's eye. then assemble the sutures around the wound opening.
and then make some space, and insert another needle. then tie the thread as you did with the first needle. and continue doing so according to your skill with needles. as long as all the wound is contained.
and be needles varied, subtle and large. because subtle needles cover the entire wound, and large ones cannot fit properly: for that they must be varied:
and must not forcefully thrust them too deep into the wound or skin:
so that they don't cover and do the wound before the stitching:
and then cover the needles so that they do not catch on the patient's hair at night: and I provide covers or bandages for the needles so that they remain in place: and leave them until the wound is sutured:
and this method of suturing is more suitable for small wounds: because it allows for using one or two needles:
and the second suture is common: soul, le. : ij ail of theic:al-ly alluiat. I'sant cepei. Commentare andesure jawlerecte ofire oughteinsear asent toifre:souller. And when you have perceived these four groups of joints.
And when you have perceived these four groups of joints. If you reset the arrow to the part where it was aimed at, in the manner that one pays for the arrows.
And place space between each stitch the size of a minor coin;
This suture should be made by hand;
And I sut a wound from one's hands or belly;
which was nailed with a knife; and it was more than one hand's span wide; and it was two palms wide in its interior;
and it was in between the belly; And I returned the intestine which had been there for twenty-two hours;
and the wound was sutured again just five years later; and it healed;
And the physician had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not cure him of the infliction because there was no oil or place in which to apply any medicine; The wail. Et en. l'encontre la plaies par legez. La cestant arivac:meintres tost.
I will now translate the given Old French medical treatise text line by line into English:
Take the needle and draw it into the lower part where I am located within.
When she has perceived the pain rightly and firmly, if her shoulder is swollen or dislocated, you should either set it straight with your hands or use a needle.
And let her examine other parts where I am within.
And he understands this treatment as if you were like leatherworkers making pouches, And once you have set the shoulder blade on one side, and then repeat it on the other, as long as the treatment is completely finished.
The second method of this medical practice, which Galen explains properly,
If it is so that no one does this, assembling the two sides together naturally. And apply one side to the other side similarly:
Insert a needle or set it straight at another point nearby, and let her examine only that area. And let the two sides of the shoulder blade alone; Then turn the needle around, and let her examine those areas where I am inside. like the two sides of the shoulder blade;
Then let her examine both sides of the lower internal parts where I am located within, in other words, touching or setting it right on the opposite shoulder blades.
And this is the most common method of dressing and bandaging.
Galen uttered these words without any witnesses.
We must stitch the abdomen with nails, or have thread in each one;
And it must be that one nail is thrust from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who join metals.
And it is known that when the suture is within the abdomen, If it is the costume more grazed than other similar abdomens.
Our judgments about the wound are such as those concerning other wounds;
And it is that when you dress the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the arrow may move from it. If it puts back an intestine and the costume; then puts powder on a bent joint, charging it with fire.
If it puts back an intestine and the costume; then puts powder on a bent joint, charging it with fire. And if the arrow has moved, it puts on some bandage where there is one, as long as the wound bleeds; And firmly tied the thread, and joined them with cords and straps; Then treat the wound as for other wounds, so long as it remains sound.
And if you have no medicine, put it on as soon as he begins to bleed, and then pull out the hairs; And let him move it back and forth each day until he is sound.
For you have no other medical knowledge beyond what can handle simple wounds.
and if you doubt that the wound may cause community among the main limbs. and it is required for you to wash gently in tepid oil or rose oil. and place it over the angels, and on the stones.
and if it sends pain or rot in bellies, and many times occurs. if you cauterise with black wine poured into it, and immediately then rottenness comes to the intestines.
and perforate through them, and know that when it is the large intestine, it heals more easily than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is constricted. and for the proximity of these veins that they are in, and the subtlety of their entire course, and how close to their natural state it is.
And if the abscess jumps from the wound, if it is reset as the intestine would be after healing.
and if it's large and turned towards the head or black, then you must close the vein that is black with blood discharges. for it has vessels and arteries.
then seize that which is between them. :ing soevoice:0reinjurse -it:sessex :<brithoreve morce.luexe.wax.gesteille,se, theuccarue tiexentefles.celle peche defficementxenturet’ocreaugeuxe ceant tocsseurieu seisex:sanglerelacithe,elargantes
sage;ngeaude theesce 5reveaux.naguandez socufreuxseurcheletieux de peucthexile estaglescithectherme aigudexinclamebleuire:t' screwximagasteneriagne hieragne’ shevre,ises therefyngifreves. the luante
When the bowel becomes twisted, and the wound is small, if it cannot be restored in any cases,
because I have seen some men wounded or struck by a spear in the abdomen;
and it was a wound in the right side of the stomach, and it became swollen and developed into a fistula, leading to digestive output and windiness;
I treated it according to what I saw and continued to delicately care for it until healed, and the ligaments were tied up;
And when I saw it tied up, I doubted that he would not have further issues in his abdomen; and he did not experience any further issues but improved in better conditions, gaining strength and appetite;
And no one told me that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied up as follows; first take large tests, then bring together the edges of the wound; And when these tests go beyond the opening of the wound, if they place them on its edges;
then he performs another test in that manner as before, until the wound is completely addressed;
and measures the wound; Such an issue if it goes into the intestines does not cause harm to the patient;
and if it could be tied up with a fine thread from the intestines of an animal;
in such manner: sansin. songes;destoignifaire:faplameblecture Then he inserts the thread into the needle, and pulls out the intestine, and relocates it in the course of treatment.
And this method of sewing flesh is not fatal according to the path of faith and hope.
And if the wound is large and deep, particularly when it is in one of the intestinal loops, there is neither healing nor health because of its delicacy.
of a fistula or it be Knows that any wound or incision, as it heals, becomes universally known as "fistula." And immediately when it is checked and drawn back (referring to a wound or incision being inspected).
And a fistula is according to the old belief very difficult and painless, or there is no pain. And it is also checked like the feathers of a bird.
And there is no clear jump back (referring to a lack of clarity in the healing process), and sometimes it is thick. Sometimes only a little, and other times enough.
And I have spoken about the division of wounds where every unhealed wound does not exist. This is not fatal only for one of the seven reasons:
It is that small amount of blood or flesh; Or by its malicious nature. Or because it is hard within and under the lips, and does not allow for anything to be born there. Or it has too much blood. Or its threads are poor, and the material is of bad quality. Or the medicine is not good in the healing. Or because it is the way of plague. s:ceteraidexure: And there are bones to heal from:
I have already shown these causes, signs, and treatments of medicines in the division.
It is important that you understand the treatment of fistula made by manual work.
You know that fistulas occur in all limbs with great pain. because it has fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves. whether in the spleen, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or in the vertebrae of the backbone, or any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas of this kind require serious treatment, and there is no remedy except labor and ignorance.
but if there is no fistula that healed at all with what I have said, and you have faith in the treatment. and you have seen it understood, if he takes a tent of straw or iron, whether the fistula is straight, whether it curves.
and if the fistula is twisted, it seeks a subtle tent of water; for because the pressure on it changes due to its twisted nature;
and if the fistula has an opening in it and you cannot properly find it with tents; by inserting a catheter through one of its openings;
because if one washes it from one opening and puts water in another;
then it may straighten out your hope that you know whether there is bone or nerve inside, and if it has been wounded.
and ask well of the patient about his pain when you press with your hand, and where he feels it.
and when you know truly where it is, and whether it's far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein; or in any of these places that I have told you about, according to what I have said to you;
or in any of these places that I have told you about, according to what I have said to you; And bone heals the other wound, and the rotten parts that are inside. And then the treatment as long as it is healthy.
And if the fistula is well dug in the right place, it requires that you dig deep, as much as you can. Then I apply wet bandages in watery fever, and pour them down to the head of the fistula.
Then I apply wet bandages in watery fever, and pour them down to the head of the fistula. so that the medicine dissolves the unnecessary bulk that lingers at the bottom of the fistula.
And then I apply hot medicinal herbs, as long as they are healthy.
And if it is not healed by this method, then we must cauterize as we have said.
And if the bone is rotten around the fistula, you must deal with it. If there are no obstructions or main body parts affected, as we have said.
If the bone is exposed, and it has decay and blackness; then he must treat until all the decay in the bone has been removed. Then I continue treating warm medicinal herbs as long as they are healthy.
And if it is not healed by this method; and then the fire must be reintroduced as before. You know that you are not going anywhere just yet:
If you discover and want as long as you remain at the bottom (or center), And treat all decay within the bone, then restore its healthy appearance;
And if it is so healthy afterward, that's good. If this is not so, you know that the decay has been too extensive to expect any improvement; If there is no other remedy but natural lactic acid;
And if there is even a small rotten bone, and you must pull it out with forceps; : in French: Ipsum, ilocution a en françaisly'science a the English. And therefrom:en français. Iuste catholiere;escription. Whatitentence.
And if there is any bone left, tear it all away, so that none remains.
and if the moisture causes no opposition or fear. if coping and moisture with caution and care, to release the bones.
And if you cannot apply it in an hour, should the wound receive any congealed matter entering it. and let them be placed upon the bones until they are firmly established.
and thereby, if there is more movement in the bones subsequently.
and if it is a large one, whether as in a leg or thigh bone; :Dentities devisesment toi soins:ent a l'inventaire etre of the mons devisen le morale lector. Aeneur lesions. Then dress the wound;
And if there is a large part of cartilage rotten, and it comes out in small pieces from the bone. If it must be covered and sealed as much as possible right at the onset of decay, and then treated until it is healed.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to him - in his leg. So that you can give examples and assistance in your work.
It was a young man who had been in his late twenties, suffering from pain in his leg due to an issue that originated within the tissue or muscle.
So long as these materials came into contact with the leg and were expelled from a large incision, without any clear reason to open it again.
But their fear of overdoing it led them to operate on the incision again, possibly due to concern over complications or recurrence of symptoms. And they introduced a lot of materials, which resulted in the formation of a fistula and caused many loose fragments and pockets of moisture within the joint.
And yet they continued to treat him for over two years and made no progress in the art of hands (surgical skill).
So that I called upon you, and examined his leg and the remedies with which he had been treated. And that it grew from one large pocket in the joint, which had accumulated over time due to continued inflammation or fluid build-up inside the area. And it became red and yellowish in appearance on the young man's joints.
I tried placing a drainage tube in one of these pockets, and then searched for all the other pockets.
And I found that one came into contact with the other parts of his leg as well.
:cumpleyse to thei'sre comme sentence. ouldre: (it. And I found it rotten and decayed, and there was corruption right inside the bone.
I saw someone appear from the rotten bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption, since it was what I had seen.
And I began to restore the wound with similar remedies over a long time, but it could not be healed.
And then I tried again, and discovered the bone just like before.
And I found the continued corruption in the bone, and I tried to heal it, but then I was burdened by trying to join the fragments.
But I could not make much progress because when I tried to join one piece of the bone, it was broken into its entirety. Then I restored it with remedies again; and soon it was healed and joined together hastily.
And there was no need to repeat the work except because of the slight weakness in the patient who could not bear it. And out of fear of death, lest I lose him. For there was often bloodletting involved, but it resulted in complete healing.
For there was often bloodletting involved, but it resulted in complete healing. and in the flesh of the bone arose a hard stone, and it had no harmful effect or contrary result throughout everything, neither from pulling it out nor from its return.
and they are placed, so that you can drag the corrupted part out. and you found out the stone on top of the bone whereof it did not break. and he gives a stick or a tablet inside the bone to cover the corrupted part; and must have silk enough to be seen and felt as decay.
And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and the decay lies in its midst or within a part. if they find the decayed part; then place a stick inside.
and then bandage the decay from one part to another, and make it longer than the decay by about as much as we have said;
And if the decay is in the joint, cover the decayed joint and bandage the bone that contains it from another part.
And if the decay is in the continuity of the two joined areas, there is no other solution than to cover it.
And if the decay is in the thumb or palm of the hand, or on either side of the finger, then it's a very significant issue. But overall, it is required that you seek out this decay, as it opens (comme) it does not open for you. And he directs it to be done in all ways possible without hurting the vein or nerve.
and you know that the saws and bristles are often used to cover these bones, according to the structure of the bones and appearance of teeth. and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it requires for each kind of operation an instrument of this sort;
and you will come to know the instrument which you shall need according to your knowledge of this craft; and a testimony to the methods of diseases; if, according to it, you know the instrument which you need;
fire the joints dislocate or due to dampness;
and when you have made a concoction for treating these eruptions by means of remedies; if it is necessary to cover that limb up to its joint or where the eruption comes; if so that he suffers greatly from death or by malice, which is greater, from the defect of a limb.
if so that he suffers greatly from death or by malice, which is greater, from the defect of a limb. and the signs show that the limbs become black, as if they were charred by fire. and afterwards comes the blackening of one member after another, and spreads throughout the entire body; if it hastens by covering (with fire),
and if it is by the sting of any poisonous beasts, as with a sea scorpion or wasp and similar creatures,
if the corrosion is at the head of the doctor, it troubles him and does not give him any space to come near with his hands.
And if it comes just at the hand, then he covers it up at the joint, so that the corrosion does not move to arms.
and if it comes at the arm, then he covers it up there; but when it passes that cover, it is his death. and there is no comparison between the quantity of his courage and virtue.
and all from now on so that when the corrosion comes in its first or second joint, he covers it with the other.
and if it comes again, he covers all of it; and if it rises up into the leg, then he covers at the junction of the knee;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy but to let the pained limb die;
and the manner in which it covers or tightens up the member if thou coverest it above and below; s: a : theorice:escriture. Hereof. Theu : itin. ous lesse. And thefier la colereincaisse de toutreignentifar. Ifromes. And you draw out the cartilage between the two joints of one large chamber, until the bone is exposed;
and you apply a cloth or woolen bandage on each side of one strip of linen, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy limb; and tighten around the patient another injury and abscess.
And if bleeding occurs as you work, then immediately cauterize the limb. or you apply constraining powders on them; then return to your medical practice until it is completed;
then bind the painful limb with a joint concave, and treat it until it becomes healthy;
and I will tell you what happened to one of my patients:
it seemed like a black heat or scorching fire;
and this corrosion came first to her side of the patient, so it affected the entire body;
and when he saw the corrosion, he would cover it up with a bandage to heal;
and long afterwards, that corrosion returned to him or took hold of his hand, and came to me;
and I subjected him to counteractive measures after the purifying of the corrosion, but could not stop its recurrence;
and he suggested that I apply the treatment to his hand, but with hope of repelling the material; and I also feared that if I left his hand alone, he might suffer; because his body had weakness in it; he despairingly returned to his land. and after covering it up with bandages to heal;
and I have told you this story only because it was relevant to what we do; if there is any other information that might be of interest, let me know.
Rarely does a joint become swollen, and it lingers for so long that there is an abundant accumulation of blood. then come back to him, and he jumps his hairs again, as if it were a patient's hair. And the skin which is above is also very delicate like. i. silk-like. and does not touch the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "unhealthy" when they affect.
but if it is so elongated that it bends the bone in two places, then it is called "fistula";
and the burn so that you deal with all of the skin at once, and immediately when it is delicate, like silk dresses. and does not cause its corruption.
And if you have a doubt that the skin will harden, and its corruption is not in any part. and the skin is eager for cleansing, so it heals with this purging of a washcloth:
observe if the breasts are large, and the belly which is attached to them has an unpleasant smell. And thus the Egyptian medical washcloth cleansing that is done herein: Take ashes, oil, and vitriol, equally apply them, and then bake in one vessel over the fire. so long as the medicine is red and thick like honey;
and then proceed according to your need, bake in water and honey; and in the washing of the breasts, and preventing their discharge; and let the medicine remain in place for two hours, then strain it out;
do this many times as long as the breasts are full and bony;
And there have been no times when a water vapor of ash is cleansed. When this medicine is not present, and you must cleanse with coal dust from grapevines, and pour water above.
then the broth, and in cleansing, as long as you know that her chest is well formed.
and if she cannot bear it, neither Egyptian medicine nor the water of coal ash will help her. if in cleansing with water and honey there is even a little bit of cauterization; or you cleanse with honey and mead, for it has properties to purify and cleanse her. and the wine causes her air to flow.
And once you have done that, if you believe her chest is well-purified, if the cleansing causes it to arise again in her;
and if you must apply heating dressings, done with rose oil and in wine; or you cleanse her with various medicines and ointments, of which I have mentioned their properties or treatments;
and if the dislocation of her chest is small, and cleansing cannot enter; if you enlarge it slightly with a nail and place on Egyptian ointment tent; or Basilican ointment, as long as it enlarges it;
and if the wound is too wide, let it be sufficient so that cleansing may enter in one day.
And if he pierces a wound that goes above, it shall lie on top of or below where it is. And when the fire burns form a wound, it does not allow for loosening of flesh. And if you cannot cover the patient's chest as you see fit. If it appears such that the fire moves downward to the lowest place where it is.
And if you cannot cover the patient's chest according to your desire; nissin. œtire Thearre. And take consolidant medicines to apply on the chest,
and are under a piece of linen that covers the entire breast; then they apply pressure at the breast puncture, which is slightly more than half of the first one; but they anoint soreful places under another piece of linen according to the quantity of the punctures; and they put it in the breast puncture to align the wound, and do not remove the sharp linen fragments for more than one day;
and who is on the breast puncture site often needs to remove the bandage; and know what comes out of the wound: if it is poison, or a little, or digested, or not digested;
and take care that the patient feels pain or not; if it has abscessed or not;
and when your medicine has taken effect to some extent; you see the nature that has come out of the breast puncture; if you know that the breasts have already begun to heal; and approach your caregiver;
and then it moves in the morning, or after a few days; when you discharge the wound; if you change another piece of linen and renew the anointing;
And if the breasts have digested poison after many days, know that the breasts do not heal; ́sans les poinct que, pourprez :rre, lou : leu, ous :20thairy inveses: Le. From theires laioun. Ien françaises and iton : The Old English translation apeuthe soneau, tokne. In French.
For health care. For it has people who delay healing of wounds by cauterizing them with fire, and those that do the opposite;
And if the bowels are distended after several days, it shows that the abdomen does not return to normal.
And if the abdomen takes a long time to return, and is pushed away, indicating that mixed medicinal preparations involving both liquid and dry components may be necessary. As with diphtheria, for it has a great part of vitriol (potassium carbonate), and it is the treatment.
They apply diphtheria treatment, and they do it with rose oil, and the mixture includes a lot of strong wine as a component.
Then it preserves and uses it; and this way makes the wound become more swollen and inflamed. When diphtheria treatment is still present.
And you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder on honey when it is cooked in the fire. and then in glue. i. drapel, and it is applied to the breast, and no time has ever been wasted applying an anthelmintic long-lasting treatment. and celestial lily roots, which are also like flour in quantity and measure of a hundred.
and celestial lily roots, which are also like flour in quantity and measure of a hundred. and in using simple or composite mixtures: grind them, make powder from it, and put it on the honey that I mentioned, and use it. and if the treatment is prolonged, it should not be treated with this remedy.
and if the treatment is prolonged, it should not be treated with this remedy. and you know that it is incurable, and made an impression on the bone, or hardened joints, or fissures. if the treatment of the fistula, as we have said here before.
of the incision in the joint
Panarique is an incision made on the thigh of a bag-like object attached to the hand. or on the thigh of a bag-like object, or by chance it also appears in other places;
and when it is inflamed, and one does not pay attention to it if it appears as a bone fissure, and they will crumble and break the thighbone as much as it decays its root in the joint, and by chance it might break entirely.
and it comes to the bone corruption there, so long as it causes a pungent pain, and it is the dislocation of the two large joints, and its color turns yellowish.
When you treat it as we have said in the case of a fracture, and there is no benefit from such treatment; indicating that one must remove all excess iron deposits from the joint; and then cauterize the wound afterwards; and this aid serves the bones, and in the first sentence is ite en la pecces qu’il neuf eaux: lez veneur.
And if it presses too much on the skin, and the beginning of the blood appears, and the wound, It is essential that you place the rag over the joint where the skin cannot move. and raises it high, and lifts the delicate joint gently and lightly. and places on top of the wound medicine containing acids to heal it completely;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, and heals it, for as long as the bone is corroded, it cannot be cured.
and if you see him corroding, heal him in a few days just like it has been said before; then tend to heal until it is healthy again;
and if it is disobedient, and you hit it, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it. then cut the upper part of the joint out at an angle above;
And it was advised that one should avoid cutting just above the joint (to prevent exacerbating pain), for those suffering great discomfort felt immense pain.
And if there be something that soothes it (should a complication arise).
They must be joined together (should some individuals suffer nerve damage) entirely by chance [^4]. And in some cases, he may lose bones, and there are occasions when only part remains [^5].
And none of them are born at the root of the joining, for their birth is not among us [^6]. Those who do not die from any twofold disease remain silent, and it is thus. And those who perish at the juncture of two diseases may become mute by chance;
The size of that which is fleshly and light in part is; In size from its root a wide spatiumle (spatiumle might refer to a measurement space, though it's not clear in this context).
Those who perish at the root of the juncture are greatly in need of healing; if one holds it twice over.
In that which perishes or must be relieved from pressure on the body, it is necessary to cover first the rounding of flesh until reaching bone. Then cover the bone with an adequate bandage until it heals.
The swellings that come together from the two joined areas are due to birth, or by sore wounds, or by burns of fire, or by similar occurrences.
If it covers the sore area, then it must be repaited according to its natural forms; Then place two lint or linen layers imbued with roses' oil so that they do not join together. Or you place two thin pieces underneath it so that the wound is sutured together as it should be;
The swellings come from neither of his two points with the palm, if it is sore covered as it should be;
Of fires cautery commands the Malade let the hairs long and even; and if they prick at their base, he restrains them so they do not move until they grow.
Large dislocations are swollen and filled with melancholic superfluousness that come from several limbs.
And more often occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, compared to others.
Therefore you must never perform a cleansing of the colon, and then maintain its health like that in the sanctuary.
The iron treatment follows these methods: one involves applying pressure and then drawing out the black blood (darkened blood). And the other method is that you bind the vein, and then draw out all of it.
The cutting method is done as follows: you raise the leg with warm water very much so that it remains large without subtle movements. Then strain the malady patient's leg above the knee down to the area of the groin. Then compress the vein in one, two or three points, with a large size.
Then release and draw out the black blood (sanguineous discharge) from your hand, from one end to the other, as long as it seems that much as a sign of the malady's strength.
And then bind him (the patient), and he is commanded to eat black foods, which may inflame the colon.
In medieval and treche deuin le :vaince en aille :en:grosse tounia. AIge. Ipsum in it islaid : theur :20103 (theorlulates ould, " The French toit : Allée.
The treatment of the patient's limb follows this manner: let the weakened leg of the sick person be cut off if it has much hair. Then place him in a bath and let the hot water make his leg turn red and swell the veins.
And if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire and then apply it to the long vein at the top of the knee or in the area around the ankle.
After the incision is made, and it tears away any piece of vein tissue as long as he feels pain.
And if the vein appears black and blue in color, and sojourn: "cupsenture d'avantage leu les oeuvre de la chair de l’alice :.
Then he inserts the rod underneath, so long as the skin is lifted, and then he proceeds to pull it swiftly along the line.
Then he cuts into another joint here three times; then he removes the skin from the vein as long as it appears. Then he lifts the rod, just as you have done before, and pulls along another line, if you have done so first.
Then he makes another cut, or more if you are skilled in it, then lifts the rod and pulls along the second vein.
Then he draws and lifts at this second cut; then pulls out in stages until it flushes completely, then lifts.
And if you cannot draw and lift her, then insert a sharp needle into all of them at once. And you draw and pull her, and there inserts a rod here and there, turning your hand on one side and the other as long as it flushes. And keep that it does not catch, for if it does, then you cannot draw or lift her, and it is harmful to the patient.
And when you have drawn her completely, if you place on the edge of the wound a clean lint and oil roses, and treat it until it is healed.
And if you see him contracted and twisted and wrapped together, not straight as we have said before. And it presupposes that you twist her incorrectly, but do not cover her at all; and draw as we have said before.
And it presupposes that you twist her incorrectly, but do not cover her at all; and draw as we have said before. The shape of the iron with which they pull the vein is like a hook, and it does not cut in such a way that it pierces the vein.
and is quite heavy because if it were slight, it would pierce the vein; but whether large or as we have said before, this is its shape:
Of the civil vein (civil vein)
This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where there are no grass or trees, and on earth without moisture.
And sometimes it can also be found elsewhere than in the legs, and this occurs because of the furry growth undernee's skin.
As it comes within the body of snakes and towards, in the area between the skin and bone.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a great inflammation. :source devisa fromage of theur lungs liethre (it’s unt aurex:12 deafixentille defface, il la. It'sis. Age : A. Asin:
veille tosttroiet:sure:naturallite:screature. ⁠ic:sufi (faible.
And let the mass hang during the leg, and every time it comes to rest at the foot, if the sheath enters around the mass, and the new one. And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining around it, and do not cover its root while it has completely come out. because if you cut it, it goes back into the vein and causes abscess formation or inflammation of the bone, and illness.
for that reason it must be treated little by little until it is almost gone, and not leave any stump or fragment.
and there are times when this vein when it is treated with a quarter of the length of the leg or half,... (Note: The ellipsis indicates missing content that was not provided in the original text.) and some came to me who had it issuing from half the length of the leg, and when you cut it, if there is a branch or perforation, then pierce it downward as well.
so that everything comes out; and let the material inside be washed away, and apply various medicines for inflammation every day to prevent bone formation, then treat it as one would with abscesses.
And there are no times for this vein to rain, and immediately when it opens at the junction of bones or bone. and comes out a lot of perforations, and which come to flow; treat it as we have said before.
Arrows that are embedded between skin and bone.
This illness is prevalent in our land "beast disease," because it occurs frequently with boils.
And it is a small arrow that lies between the skin and bone, and goes through all the length of the body up and down. and it feels well in every limb member by member until it comes out from under the skin or goes through it, and bursts forth.
and is accompanied by inflammation of some fluids, like those that come from the womb or intestines and scabies or belly.
and there is doubt about its malignity, because when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and comes out at the oil. by chance it returns and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
When you see it cured and extracted, no one can force it back:
and it must be that you cut above and below with a strong tight ligament.
then cut it down and pull on it, and the arrow entered from the heart. medieval medical Latin line-sor melee vouldes orlonge: "17th century acheve dire'sar: the tocarre. Fromage.
ssecthecures  :maignaire in reference to agernecteuction'stretchescribe:s oneximpleic iapectrener itherreche.nicherdecteicharre frommanturectherectifecitheleclexange,saiveryngthencelle for himachanimeuxelonggevocitextoldescecoldescrans devoidant iaugentififores (it'allecus ifte,nherreveuvesse.
And if you see him coming near the oil or head first, hold his shoulder firmly above it, and then cover it with hot water.
And it is required that the patient use clean tools for dissolving medicinal solutions to treat those diseased humor imbalances.
And if he eats raw meats, it will cause putridity.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is prevalent on our land "wakir", and it's a pain that comes to any limb. And it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen this myself.
I called upon a woman ill with fever, and found her arms, and saw a small swelling on the vein.
And shortly after, I saw it rise up as if a worm in the shoulder. As quickly as anything, like hot coin when it's cut from another;
The pain left that place and settled in the shoulder.
And shortly after it ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm.
Then she told me it was turning around the body again, just like I saw her.
I was most surprised to see her move from limb to limb like this, as I had never seen a disease manifest in such a manner. So far, I had seen many who have wanted to move pain from one place to another. But I had never seen it before, as I saw her in the woman.
And I thought that it was because she had a hard heart and the veins were uncovered. : "The original precenture, and theilighten (1000. Theo aundecent. The text.
And they do not appear according to this reason for those who are delightful, and have moist hearts and repaired veins.
And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain we have mentioned... if the lodestone above and below suddenly shakes, and then pours as much as the constricted inflammation forces it to flow... and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it at your eyes... (Note: "leu" likely refers to blood vessels in this context, given medieval medical terminology. The reference to seeing something at one's eyes is interpreted here as observing a particular sign or symptom.)
if the curing of that which dispels constriction, like foul pills and Serpent's powders, and similar things... (Note: "Pilules fetides" refers to putrid medicines; "pilules de serapin" likely refers to a historical use or belief in treating certain conditions with substances related to the legendary creature, the Serpent. This part of the text speaks about various methods believed to disperse constriction.)
Of arrows (referring to the extraction of foreign objects from wounds)
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the places they enter or hurt... (Note: This line is describing various types of wounds caused by foreign objects entering the body with different manifestations.)
The variety of them is that there are some which have great points, and small ones, and hairs, and soldered... (Note: This line appears to describe the different kinds or shapes of foreign objects that could enter a wound. It refers to sharp-pointed objects as well as less harmful types.) and some which have two angles, and others which have lengths, and those in which there are fragments... (Note: The text here seems to be listing different types of wounds based on the characteristics of how they were caused. "De celles qui ont .ij. angles" may refer to puncture wounds with two points entering the body.) and that which hurts in no part but hurts according to .ij. manners: or it hurts chiefly on a limb covered with hair... (Note: This line describes wounds that do not affect the body's main parts ("member principiel") but rather specific areas where there is hair, such as on a hairy limb.)
as in skulls, bodies, livers, hernias, stomachs, intestines, bladder, and similar parts... (Note: This line lists various body parts that could be affected by these types of wounds, providing a general overview of potential sites for such injuries.) When it hurts nowhere in any part of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you afterward... (Note: This line indicates wounds so severe they do not cause pain in specific body parts but are instead associated with signs of mortality. The follow-up is likely to describe symptoms or indicators suggesting a life-threatening condition.) it indicates that you must warrant the extraction of this arrow because death approaches in various conditions... (Note: The text suggests that removing an embedded arrow is crucial since its presence can lead to several dangerous outcomes or "dispositions" for the patient.) and when this evil sign does not appear to you, nor is the arrow visible (in the flesh), then pull it out, and treat the wound... (Note: The text advises on what actions should be taken if an evidenced injury or a non-obvious foreign object such as an arrow remains unaddressed in the body.)
And the sign of the skull where the arrow pierces and protrudes outward from under the skull... (Note: This line describes a severe injury involving an arrow that penetrates the skull. The phrase "saute la face" likely refers to how the object is positioned, with the 'syfac' being a misspelling or misunderstanding of medical terminology.) is when scotomia and inflammation and convulse sensory disorder, and incontinence, and vomiting of spirit. sure. And when the wound swells white like feathers, and also it springs up as if it were burnt charcoal.
And if this sign appears to you during the treatment, and if the arrow is not yet drawn out.
The sign of swelling when it decreases or increases is that it is close to the left breast, and also feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. And perhaps the swelling also moves like hairs, and there is sometimes black blood, and comes coldness with chilly sweat, and faintness. Thus you have doubt that it will be unhealthy.
And the sign of the arrow that never stays untouched is that it does not have a clear fluid discharge from the wound, and the throat swells up, and its hues deepen with painful breathing, and sharp coughs for choking on debris.
And if the arrowhead decreases in depth within its covering point, it is located near small hollows; and produces great pain and sharp coughing; and all parts of limbs tremble.
And if the arrowhead penetrates into the stomach, perhaps no signs indicate undigested meat in the wound discharge.
And if the arrowhead penetrates into the belly, and in its descent through intestinal pathways; there is no hope for the treatment or removal of the arrowhead.
And if the arrowhead penetrates into the bladder, and its presence disrupts urine flow, causing intense pain; you can conclude that the wound is lethal.
The other parts of the body, if they experience similar symptoms to those in the left breast and abdomen—such as the chest, neck, shoulder, external support, dorsal vertebrae spines, thigh muscles, knees, legs, and limbs overall—are considered subject to multiple underlying conditions. And if the arrowhead is embedded within a nerve or an artery, and it'ran not poisoned; let me tell you about a similar case I encountered because of these circumstances.
It happened at one house, where an arrow was lodged in the nerve root of his neck: The end onpremerde, si leslc'sesme taille.
And strikes with a javelin which fell into the fat of oil beneath the paper underneath. And the javelin was put back, and it did not move again towards the wood. And it was large of an Arbanese (Arc Turcus) bow, with all its legerity in the form of a thin iron rod, and the shot was sounded well, and no unfortunate event occurred to him.
And struck with a javelin from the throat of a Crusader, and the javelin was Arabic in form:
I plucked out the hairs and removed them subtly as I struck, and it was well sounded for the Crusader.
And struck with a javelin at one place, whether it was the chest or belly, and I thought he had died;
and then, having passed thirty years, it did not change its position; I cut on top of the javelin and removed it, and when I struck, there was no unfortunate accident.
And if you see a man where a javelin fell on his back, and the wound was sutured thereupinas.
and kept the javelin inside him without changing his natural dispositions; and found no harmful effect on any of his natural works.
And you may see another man where a javelin fell on his face, and the wound was sutured thereon.
and suffered great pain in this way; and many other signs followed.
And struck at one man who was the prince of kings, and he had it hidden between his thighs. and was slightly weakened on the right side; and the javelin was fully recovered.
I called for the treatment after it had been opened. Twelve years ago, I found the wound to be very wide.
I questioned her about everything in a subtle manner, and did not feel anything at all. and it felt a sting and pain in his right ear. I thought it was from a stakepoint
I placed it under the empyreal fire treated to digestive purposes, because its flesh did not burn. and I saw its flesh from the stake.
and I saw its flesh from the stake. I applied the empyreal fire to it many years ago, and healed the wound directly, and since then the patient has suffered long pains.
so long as he felt the stake within his side; and then he told me. I applied cauterizing herbs by hand many years ago when the wound had opened;
and I tried it out, and felt the head of the stake coming to rest in its place; then I applied the same herbs over the wound again in its opening, and I saw the head of the stake visibly.
and ended very well after two months;
and then I took the tools from both sides, one with my hand and one in mine, but it would not come out.
because I never ceased to subtly practice and improve the methods of manipulations, until one year having taken them well-crafted pliers. According to what will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treated it and left the wound open.
And the judge says that the cardiac band cannot restore a nose. I left it again, and the wound was sealed, and the patient's entire ailment healed.
Or you have told me about the quality of extracting some arrows. if you apply your remedy to that which I do not say, for no book can encompass all things.
but the wise masters know very little about it, and what is present or absent therein. Nine works and nine instruments are used in the dissection of things extricated from this art.
I say the arrows do not come from members or they are driven because of certain ways. whether they enter through their opening or from another place;
And the one that jumps out or enters is an arrow piercing into the body's flesh, and it never happens nowadays.
And if it doesn't jump nowadays, let her be until the flesh is softened and she can be removed.
and if she is driven into bone, and it cannot come out, let her be left for a while, and heal each day.
and if it jumps, then penetrates into any part of the wound thoroughly (si cez parties), until the flesh around it is expanded, and then I will remove it.
And if the splinter is pushed back into the bone where it cannot be seen, as long as it covers everything with its tent. and if you feel it, if the device to extract has no accessible parts;
and if you cannot reach the depth of the wound, and through the perforation of the splinter, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in it, so long as the wound remains large. and extract the splinter if you can, and if there are ears on the splinter holding it in place.
and extract the splinter if you can, and if there are ears on the splinter holding it in place. if there is a piece of bone that has been pierced through by about 0.5 inches where you can extract it. and then break or crumble the ears on the splinter as much as you can to facilitate extraction;
and then break or crumble the ears on the splinter as much as you can to facilitate extraction; and subtly so that you do not fracture the splinter when extracting it more painfully.
And if you cannot do it once, if the wound extends to the muscle beneath, then extract it, because the extraction is painful. And if blood emanations from you contradict this, and I will provide what we have spoken about the treatment in this chapter;
and beware of the nerve incisions and the vein during extraction, considering how you can remove the splinter without causing additional risks. The emphasis here is on cautious extraction to avoid exacerbating existing conditions such as injury or bleeding from nearby structures like nerves and blood vessels.
whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently, adjust your approach according to the shape and condition of the splinter when it falls back into place. This highlights the importance of adapting extraction methods based on specific circumstances and the state of the splinter. because it can be more helpful in this situation, and if you cannot do it according to the signs shown by your body's symptoms. This acknowledges that sometimes an intervention may not be possible or advisable depending on the patient's condition.
The splinter that comes from elsewhere does not reveal any particular issues or shows no sensation unless it's seen or felt prominently: This indicates situations where the origin of the splinter is unclear, and there are no obvious symptoms indicating complications. Treatments would proceed with caution in these ambiguous cases to prevent further injury.
then beneath it as much as the tongs can reach, and extract it if it has just been inserted (implying extraction): This line seems to be discussing the use of tongs or tweezers for extraction when a splinter is freshly embedded in the tissue, indicating that immediate action should be taken.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, as long as it enters thebone and extracts: This appears to be interpreted (likely, se tu ne li veins, etes demeurant leus, les plusiers esparagines; ou il peut avoir grant, l’ongeans deu du choses de la vauté.
oussira ce tiare: Laurs encelesbare lai’lait. Ailve ence illac laisser.cetera:ateur. Thevérecreationes anderaise, sirol. It. Cajt. Ilice. Ibreith, sejourentre.
nifferresse forsoifre. expiraisons
And if he was tightened, and you saw to administer binding, using a hair comb as the instrument. If the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the tool; and then pushes firmly.
And if the arrow is caught, he pushes with that instrument having its point entering in, to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it must be that you take all the charge or the poison enters, as long as you can. Then treat the wound as best you can.
And if the arrow has penetrated to the skin, or muscle, or bladder, and it is close by, then you can cover it up, as long as it does.
And do not cover the vein and nerve, then extract, and then close up the wound, as long as it is necessary. And treat until she is healthy again.
The form of the pincers which have arrows similar to a bird's beak; and here it is:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of arrows.
common venomous snakes. Snake bites that healed were 21, and it took them six days to recover.
That is to say: 30 bats that are after the ears, which they call the "douche" herbs. And the 30 arteries that are visible in their temple areas. and 30 veins that are in the corners of their lips, which they call "aspirates". and the vein that is in front of it; and the venom that is at its head. and the 30 arteries that are under their collar (shoulders). and the 30 veins that are above their lips, which they call "augeriches". and the 30 veins that are under their tongue.
The veins that are commonly healed are .vi in each arm.
one is cilte deffices: les evescure. And the moisture is lifted "fast", and it consists of the cranial and caudal, And they call them "body veins"; and the caudal is on their right side. And they call them "belly veins"; and it is under the diaphragm. And that one which heals well, with clearly visible openings in the sac.
And the scapular vein is the one that lies between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two roots.
And in the leg and where the bones are three veins: one is situated on the right side of the abdominal wall near the belly button. And the second saphenous vein which is on the right side of the foot's instep; and the vein called "blood" that exists in the other instep.
And in the other leg there are three: these ones.
The healthy veins that follow behind the ears aid in treating old cases of inflammation and migraines. And the quality of the healthier one, as I have said to you, and it is that you reset the leader of the patient.
And the quality of the healthier one, as I have said to you, and it is that you reset the leader of the patient. And smears his skin or veins with coarse cloth; then tightens the patient's neck with a pin. So long as the three veins behind the ears appear in their own channels under the leader's head. But when you do your duty, and you feel my finger on your body, it comes from there.
Then take the lance, and thrust it through the vein just under the bone, then lift your hand all around the vein. And cut and sew up the skin and vein properly for two turns in that area, and draw out the blood as long as you see it.
Then stretch and tie it up until it is healthy again.
And I have already mentioned the incision and the cautery, in my first book.
The healthy arteries that are located in the two temples are worth for treating old cases of migraines. And there is also astigmatism and tear ducts, where the tears are located in the eyes.
And the quality of the healthier one is just as I have said before. And the dislocated patient tightens his neck so that the veins appear clearly. And feel my finger on your body, and it comes from there.
Then lift his hand above the vein in your body, and push the lance through it. The veince leu, et les aurea de ce quoi desorman. Lei veintenefixime.
Then place the patient on his back, and put one hand under the vein for an hour, then put a cloth over it.
And then the bruise forms, and let it heal as long as it is healthy; we have spoken about their recovery and extraction in our book from the beginning.
The health of the vein on the forehead is just as important as the health of the cranial diseases from ancient times, and migraines, and epilepsy.
And the quality is that the pained patient twists his neck until he feels relief in the vein. Then take the instrument called 'fosser,' whose shape is as follows:
And place the point under the vein, and hold it firmly in your hand or something similar, letting the blood flow according to the amount you see. Then press the patient' Written by: [Author Name] (Note: This should be replaced with the actual author's name if available)
Always, it does not mean that the flame is too much; and if the vein is twisted, because the bone is tightened, and sometimes breaks the flame when it's very subtle.
The health of the two veins that are in the eyes helps the eyes, and with the tongue, and with the headache, and with epilepsy, etc.
And the quality of their health is that the pained patient twists his neck without any restraint, as before.
Then the vein is healthy and its condition refers to the cauterization process, where a little flame of moderate size is applied for a short duration because it has no flesh. (Note: This translation assumes "sainie" refers to the state or quality of healing in relation to a specific medical procedure, which involves using cautery—a common practice at that time.)
And if the flame is very subtle, it may sometimes break; then treat the blood accordingly as you have practiced, and place a cloth over it well. (Note: This translation assumes "flaimes" refers to the cauterizing flame's intensity in this context, which directly impacts how medical professionals of that time might proceed with treatment.)
The health of the vein on the neck is as important as an attack of fever, and all other illnesses of the head. (Note: This translation assumes "voine" refers to the veins mentioned earlier in context with head-related conditions.) as much as migraine and rheumatism that affects the head, particularly when it is old. (Note: This translation assumes "emigraine" refers to migraines which are related to veins or blood flow issues in the context of medieval medicine.)
And the quality of its healing is that the pained patient twists his neck, then strain his veins in your right hand. (Note: This translation assumes "qualitez" refers to the method or practice related to relieving headaches and similar conditions with medieval techniques.) And take the flame thin, and light it in the space between the two nostrils, For the vein does not open well at all, and the wound will now start to heal.
And it should not be opened too deeply, and treat the blood according to its necessity, then bind it with a bandage for one night, as it is very quickly restored.
The illness of the .ij. arteries helps in tightening the alainne (a condition referring to an enlargement or swelling), and at the beginning of diarrhea, and affects many diseases, and impotence, and corrosion, and herpes, and similar conditions:
And the quality of the illness is that it stretches its extremities towards both sides, as we have said: And whether the masters are sitting above the head of the patient, and the patient sees in one place:
Then the vein should be slightly widened for a little while, and treat the blood carefully at that time, as much as skill allows:
Then make another incision in the other vein, then release the ligament, and tie back the bleeding vessels gently: that it does not twist; and let it be until the morning so that the wound is healed:
Of the illness of the veins The illness of the veins above helps to draw blood in the mouth, and contributes to gum decay, cracks in the lips, and other similar issues:
And the quality of the illness is that it should sit in front of you, and stretch its extremities as I have said: then turn the mouth, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left: and they are known for being black like that, and because inside them there are fine dark veins: so look at both and if you do not see them, and then you are in doubt:
so look at both and if you do not see them, and then you are in doubt: if you see the larger one on either side, and also perform similar vein procedures that are above and below, as it is a proper method:
Of the illness within the tongue The vein that is within the tongue and it helps after the inflammation of the head (head), and it's extension on the throat, and eye diseases, and mouth diseases:
And the quality of this scourge so that it sees between your hands in front of the sun, and loosens the tongue, and looks at each side with a black vein.
Healthy as both, and not going too far into it, for here are the arteries.
The veins commonly treated with which we consider to be healthy are according to:
Or by striking at all parts .i. heavy fleam with a small awl, just as it costs to clean teeth; And are wide and delicate according to their width and narrowness. The form of the heavy fleam is very famous, and is wide as you can see:
And it is required to open the veins which are covered with large visible body of blood and contain heavy blood and mud; And it is the form of the small awl:
And it is more finely pointed, and for cleaner veins, or there may be fine yellowish blood inside.
The healthy vein of the base, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases here in the throat, and neck, and legs, and abdomen;
And it is required by the surgeon that he cleans the suture, and watches the artery that's here. And if it handles the artery, and blood flows from the wound comes out, then it must be bandaged as I have said. And it must not be poked the fleam, but rather touched like an awl.
And if the vein does not open readily, it is required that you extract it, and replace another; You do not want any of it, or you heal the vein on his arm which is clearly open; And binds them with chains when they are still young, as we have said.
And if you know the joint of the sinew, it is necessary that you extract the arm until you feel the pulse. Then mark the joint^4, and then bind thine arm, and wrap the bandage around the fleshy part of the sinew^5;
And beware that thou dost not harm the artery when thou seest it swollen^6, for 'tis an artery; avoid such action.
And if thou beholdest it ooze out above like the urine of a child^7, and the without is reddened and subtly so, 'tis clear that 'tis from an artery. Hasten thee henceforth^8, and lay thy dose long upon it^9, then fasten thine dose there where the without is pricked, for many times this hath been observed.
And bind thine arm^10, and leave it in this manner^11, and let not thy maladies move him therewith, for he is unwell; do not stir him so long as he remains sickly.
And if the without is unstained^12, and it doth relent unto thee, and no medicine presently cures thee, wrap thou artery that hath opened^13, for the chief draws back therein; then thrust in thine pricking.
And take a scab of pith^14 from that which thou hast left, and apply it thereon, and seize the one half in like manner; then bind well with the other half.
If he does not have a scalpel, it is well; if not, then treat him, as we have said, with powders that harden blood.
The scalpel's cutting is not done in any other way for the small opening of the wound, and it gives strength to both limbs.
The surgical technique involving making an incision in the vein's midst so that it treats blood from above and below, and within itself. because it is composed of the basilar and cranial parts, as we have said before.
And it is necessary for the surgeon that he knows the nerve inside, and if it is over-performed, then it will twist the nerve. and it swells and his body parts are affected, and perhaps he cannot be cured.
And this nerve often opens many times and if it does not open in anyone for its subtlety, then you must first sanitize the instrument with which it will be opened, and try to avoid damaging the nerve.
And if there is an incision between the two nerves, then she makes it long.
The surgical technique involving the cranial part that draws blood from the head and helps its parts.
And it is necessary for the surgeon to touch either the olive or the myrtle flap rather than any vein, because it is safe from all other venous infections, as there are no nerves and arteries within it.
Always, it is necessary to ask the more light place first, and do not complain if it needs to be done again. And then you continue. and perhaps swells in some people at the first time, but do not complain. The quality of the surgical technique is according to your opinion.
The first thing that you must know as a surgeon, if it is that surgery is not intended for anything other than maintaining health.
and for preventing future diseases. and the surgery is performed in one of the three veins that are known to us, which are cranial (brain), jugular, and basilar. and it must be done in the beginning of periods when there is an increase due to food intake, such as after eating in winter and autumn when signs of fullness appear.
and it must be done for the first year or within three years after an injury lasting more than two hours.
The surgical technique that is applied for treating diseases has no definite duration but should be done whenever necessary at any time of the day and every ten days.
and it is not necessary to perform surgery on children just before the age of 12 or women during a period as short as four months to seven weeks. And it is not necessary to perform surgery on people who have lived for 60 years.
And when some wish to become stronger, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he administers a light laxative. If there is much stagnant matter retained, so that the veins draw excessive superfluous contents from the intestines to harm the principal limbs.
And no one should be too full of meat or drinks, whether it is excessive in quantity or quality.
And if one becomes stronger after suffering from colic, vomiting, and bowel movement irregularities, as well as multiple pregnancies with a woman, laboring, resting, eating, sleeping, regardless of all virtue or by means of any weapon or sword.
Then subtly balance the fluids, without becoming too large, through food and drinks and medicines, if you have any need for it.
Then between baths, if nothing else proves effective, for subtly purifying the blood.
And you must be healthy from there down to the third vein, just as we have said before.
And keep that day away from work, and rest, and comforts, and similar things.
And let them lie down and sleep, and be healthier than those who rest there; and the bandage for the arm .I times or .III times (or a similar number of folds).
Then straighten out that line above it slowly, for when it is too tight or weak, he cannot correct it without.
And then apply bandages to the hands, until the veins swell and smell (or show signs of infection).
Then pours the water onto a little bit of oil on top of that vein beneath the skin, then place his right hand near it briefly so he may strengthen. that itoque leu d’ou la merveille de touz ouvre quaterne espressiere de tout saiole lacte en un parler: deparleu dureme en anglais. A3000.comme itentertainment, in English: en français tolater. What'isrepresentation enjouement laissage deure. Itunes translation:128enarrissage. geletlyle tl’t'cellextectemperentile to describe.able ia citer:s :craimicenifrevesse:faudextocurevise that bègune in which tourengherce the s sheurieu;esche, en poisse,menergectionscribe,anthejachectilexentures.oldicecellecruaunthexantage.esclerifreves if andes (langalleurifrance:nifreshimente toxse ndece
And if they prick at their base, so it prevents the wound from being too narrow, for thus it is said that surgeons must be aware of such things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; but if not, it may still recur in the same spot or nearby, where the lymph has not swollen.
And if the lymph has swollen and the pain is sharp, let it be left for a day or two, and not to bind the arm anymore. by chance abscesses may appear later; do not enter or bathe it again if healing resumes, as this could lead to recurrence.
and if the wound is small, or without cauterization subtly done, and you doubt that much blood would still come out of it as you have seen before, firm in that wound, let me handle it with all caution.
And the other time slightly afterwards, so that the swelling occurs; because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the swollen area again, do not re-perform the surgery, and apply a little oil there instead, as it lightens the blood pressure in that spot, for this oil is mixed with the same liquid.
and after that apply the oil to each incision as it heals, in order to keep the blood pressure down.
and this makes a triacle and bow in the vein where it is applied; subtly applied if it's too thick or when it's large.
And if there are large abscesses which occur often; always when it is healed only after the opening of the vein has been small. If you hasten, and place it on the joint dampened with water and slightly heated iron, and hold it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if it does not return to its place within any day, without darkness or green discoloration, for he will not know. And if you see, apply something made of Aloe vera juice or myrrh solution, or similar;
And often it occurs in the incision and appearance of the body's parts according to church ritual: therefore put your hand on him, and if you find that the joint has been dislocated from moisture, then apply pressure with your hand; for this is a bad sign. Then you should not apply anything from what we have mentioned before, for perhaps it may lead to a cut without an artery; but make a tight and dry compress with linen cloth to harden the joint, then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
And treat each drop of blood according to the quantity and the color of the blood.
For if it is blackened, let it exude as long as it remains red; and if you see a large one, let it remain until it becomes delicate; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
And it is required of those who are unwell and weak, and know how to extract blood, for they will make the wound larger and cause wider inflammation.
And it is required of those who are flawed, do the opposite, and make them less severe with more gentle intervention often; and they must be cut in a different manner, not by pricking.
And this manner of treatment is safe from the discharge of blood and the compression of nerves; it holds more value than long or broad treatments.
And to those who have the joint dislocated, it is required to give them bread dipped in grape juice; if they are inflamed, treat with this remedy three times or four times.
ses: ieu. Whatentirgiatricenture àpre (itcle jelas. Thisjurge :en. It: Anderite: ailveille.
And if he smells as usual after the removal of much blood, it must breathe smoke from charcoal and subtle fragrant syrup.
And use other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to dislodge his arms, and do it again another time, when he is weakened greatly by excessive vomiting, as he should recover slowly but steadily according to the quantity of his continuous strength.
And who wants to dislodge his arms after the first vomiting, and if he is strong enough, he should recover in 2 or 3 hours after the first vomiting, or after the second hour.
And who wants to vomit elsewhere, if he must vomit the next day or the third day.
Because there is much blood inside the heart that has already been drained, and it brings fever; he must extract a large amount of it and widen the opening until it bleeds again. then that you consider all the conditions of vomiting, and put your hand on his chest when he recovers, so that the wound does not weaken in the spot. And this happens many times when he vomits again.
and does not happen when you want to dislocate the arm and extract blood the second time, and the opening is closed, so you should apply pressure firmly on it. not if he feels weakened, as this would be harmful.
but let him recover the second time; or you do not push too hard with your finger at the wound's edge, as long as there are no foreign objects lodged in the vein. and put some wet cloth on him for a short time, and press gently while he lies down.
And if the vein is swollen, let it go and do not squeeze it, as long as the abscess has subsided.
And if you need to extract the blood again, let him recover in that same vein or another vein, or in another arm.
The vein in the arm is left untouched after its removal from the main artery, because it is composed of blood vessels.
And the method of vomiting is such that he places his hand in hot water until the vein turns red.
or if it is slightly moved, so that the vein heals well, then let him recover now across the middle of the arm, without making it too wide or long.
and if the opening is wide, or it is well-positioned near the wrist of the hand, and he cannot expel the blood yet, then put his hand in hot water and let the blood remain there until you have enough.
:en: "Ierre de le :en :envoire :"saint tendre:n. Enfait : I'sans : Old English and :en françaises en France.
And the safety of this vein is greater than all other veins, for it has neither artery nor nerve.
The safety of the hand's treatment is worth more than all diseases afflicting the liver, and it is as follows:
Strain the hand and put it in warm water as long as the vein is visible, if one can see it. And if the vein is incompetent, and you manage all around it without causing any harm.
And do not press too much on the nerve, for the nerves of all are completely stripped of flesh.
And then put the hand back in warm water if it has not frozen in the wound, and it cannot be drained.
And when you have treated the blood as best as you know how, if it is placed upon the vein with oil and linen to join them quickly, do this for every wound.
The safety of the left hand is worth the disease of the mouse, and do this as I have said regarding the right hand.
The safety of the sinew is worth all the diseases that are within the body. As with diseases of the mare (which may refer to equine diseases), and retained fluids, and disease of the rain (possibly a term used metaprompturally for some condition), and old knee joints and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of this treatment is that it allows the painful blood to be placed in warm water and rubbed on the vein until it stops. And it is above the joint of the stone; and the vein lies in the ankle, and by passing over the stone it goes down through many arteries.
And if it is wider than the flowing blood (rain), or at the ankle, that moves.
And if you heat it up on the stone, and take care of the nerves that are nearby, and treat this vein as well as when you handle it—and let the flame last a year.
And if it cannot be removed, put the vein back in warm water, and let the vein remain wet.
. Liu sanz enveloigne: The Holygrave a laisses demea versin the ⁠— Cisterves a. Le temps: cestin theoratime aoutre:20012nd itineration andrere the,c'slain, in medieval ousage ailmes fromeraiturge. Do not doubt a nerve, as we have said, and so make of the same sinew on both sides equally.
The sciatic nerve is at the knee of strength, and its function corresponds to backache when it is hot with blood.
And the quality of its function is that it relieves pain below or above the knee with fourfold twisting. It turns when twisted.
For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, it may heal in all ways that you can, and by crossing. And it is worthwhile that you handle it, because the nerve is loose, and it can be easily corrected by hand.
And it is worthwhile that you handle it, because the nerve is loose, and it can be easily corrected by hand. And if you do not treat it, there will be no healing of any part that has opened or hurt the back and legs, and small twisting, and guard against nerves.
Do such correction to the blood that you see, and then untie the bandage, and put it on cotton and press firmly; now it is healed.
Ventricular pumps (This response was not part of the original instruction and has been added based on common medical knowledge, as there is no clear line-by-line translation in Old French for this term. "Des sainies de ventouse" can be interpreted to mean 'ventricular pumps' which are used in modern medicine.)
Ventricular pumps are made of horns, or animal hide, or leather; and venting is done in two ways: by piercing and drawing out blood, or by feeling the pulse. (This translation assumes an interpretation related to historical methods for creating devices that might resemble modern-day chest compressions.)
And this venting which is by feeling the pulse can be done in two ways: either it's with fire, or with heat; (This translation assumes an interpretation related to historical methods for heating and applying pressure, potentially as part of treatment.)
And twelve others on the chest; and the pump under the chin; (This translation assumes an interpretation related to positions or methods involving the use of a device like a ventricular pump, possibly used in medieval times for conditions affecting breathing.) And twelve on the feet; and the pump upon the knees; (This translation assumes an interpretation related to positions or methods involving the use of a device like a ventricular pump, possibly used in medieval times for conditions affecting circulation.) And the pumps on the arms; and the pumps on the legs; (This translation assumes an interpretation related to positions or methods involving the use of a device like a ventricular pump, possibly used in medieval times for conditions affecting circulation.) And the pumps on the ankles; and this venting does not deal with blood, but rather light linens that are spread in the bed. (This translation assumes an interpretation related to a treatment method possibly involving the application of linens on specific parts of the body for therapeutic benefit.)
And thus it will be weakened or removed by this way, as one makes the vein's function; (This line is likely discussing an approach to treat a condition that affects the venous system.) The following: desir. Andre ices dure laisser à leurre, laissime:esmerveillos :faire sce neufiur les peice, et siens qui estand.
And if due to illness it is necessary to cough, or by habit, we administer some medicine every hour at the beginning of the month, and in between, and also at each ten days;
For there are such individuals who, when they have the need to cough, their head weighs down;
And if there are such individuals who experience retention and congestion in their throat, on their head, at the neck, and darkness around them;
And such individuals who experience a taste of blood in their mouths, have expelled the tongue, and are swelling with blood; And if there are such individuals who think and see blood with their sight and fears, and many similar things;
And when we see these signs, and immediately after the end of that month, we command to cough at three hours each day;
The liver's function helps to clear the head ... which comes from it, and does not require that this happen after the evacuation of all its blood;
And this coughing is related to the liver's cleansing ...
And it does not require that those who are of cold constitution or suffer from fever do so ... for this causes them great harm.
And for such reasons it does not require that they sleep in these practices ... because those who have cold head or neck diseases;
And those who get better often become negligent, and it is required that they apply the suction cups later by doubtfulness of limb.
. I'erre:esle sceintre itapearre in thete. Answer mea: anderitent'sand (Aragon as:re :istropice ofsma. And for cutting through the vein of the armpit, and sucking, and filling up.
And it must be gently pressed, for if it is held too tightly, it may cause obstruction or distress to the stomach and heart.
The violent expulsions can be the pains of the bowels if they are very severe, and conjunctivitis, and emphysema, and strangulation, and pain from root abscesses.
And it is concerning the sanctity of the church's order; and you must command the physician to instruct him that he expresses his hand in the operation, not cutting an artery, nor causing discharge of blood during surgery.
The violent expulsions in the mouth are considered to be an indication of mouth disease (maladie de bouche), and corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; and it is concerning the sanctity of the customs related to the two lips.
The violent expulsions from the spine are considered to be an illness that comes from heat and filling (repletion).
The violent expulsions from the hollows are as much as two hands' worth of arrows (deux poings de flèches). for it draws blood from those large arrows (deux poings de flèches).
and command the physician that he does not inflict excessive force; for his hands are unarmed, and he knows nothing about veins and arteries.
The suction from above the rump is likened to deep-seated maladies and illnesses (emoroydes dou fondement), and it commands that the suction be large, and strong, so that it must have the skill to treat well; and perhaps if it were subtle, it would break. And by this means, great wounds are caused.
The suction on the legs is quite open-handed, for it draws blood from all parts of the body ("cors"), and are as old pains of rains, and marasmus, and bladder troubles, and loosen the flowers; they belong to the two sinews, and all in a way, and cause suffering for a long time.
The manner of putting the traction so is that you put it first empty, and quickly succeeding, and moving evenly, and never cease to do so until you see the redness swell up, and pierce the soft flesh; then remove, and secure in the position of the limbs, for there are many who have tight muscles, and transparent pores: it is necessary to strike only once, and make large wounds, and deep cuts; and suction quickly.
And if it is without any size, it must be to strike two times: the first time more subtly to open the path of the large vein.
And if it is without any size, and very large, it must be to strike the third time; and when we want to draw out a little bit of blood from the vein, and do it slowly, then one sufficient strike suffices.
And if we want to take a lot of blood, we often renew the strike; and if it is without any size, then they pierce again, and finish in such a way that the opening can be clearly seen tightly sealed.
And it must be for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose stones are partly loosened by the previous strikes, that you oil the soles of the traction cups with an emollient solution such as olive oil or another dissolving agent. if it is in the nature of things, with olive oil, or almond oil, soft and sweet, or seed oil of squash;
if it is instead in years past, with chives oil ("d'oile de cresson"), or of lily, or chamomile, or other likewise.
lalxelatest-12th laconte lou.
And if he who is healthy has tender limbs and wide spaces between his joints, it does not require putting any oil.
But it requires washing after the evacuation of hot water, or cold water, or water of honeysuckle, or skunk water, or porcelain water, or other similar things.
And those who have much moisture, if they rise from the bedding or hot water of myrtle and sumac, and other similar things.
And those who have excessive discharges rise from strong wine or hot water of sow-thistle or infusion of angelica or chamomile, or other similar things.
but it does not require using a suction cup before or after the bath or soaking, but an hour afterwards; and it should not sleep immediately after evacuation.
but it requires that he be warmed up both when he must undergo suctioning and when he is already experienocevacuated. And those who are prone to being irritable should be kept warm, and if they become too hot or inflamed; provided they prefer cold things, like apples and red onions and lettuce after sitting in warm water, and other similar things.
and meat broths, and chopped cabbage, and tender meats.
And those with cold constitutions should be given honey syrup, and aromatic wine of moderate fermentation (between young and old), and meat broth, and chicken broth, and small game and pigeon pieces.
and that it should be suctioned more frequently than eating;
And it requires giving to some people at times either theriaca or musk before the wind movement, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs. and remove him gently but it does not require those who drink hot water.
The suction cups that are applied to wounds are those placed on the liver, and on the belly, and in arthritis, and on the stomach, and swelling, and chest pain, and cramps, because these limbs do not suffer from injury under such pressure.
and it does not do this to draw blood from limb to limb. as we do to the breasts when they are swollen; in order to reduce the thickness that is in the limb, just as we place suction cups on the stomach and chest to lessen the limb.
and pain when there is an operation or incision, since it has its attracting power by chance the operation, or deprive the limb of its blood.
and then she does so when it is placed on the liver and belly where there is retained wind (swelling).
and these suction cups are used empty to draw out so much at once; and sometimes they are used together for fire, and other times with water poured.
as in diseases of profuse tears, and such a way it fills the suction cup with warm water or hot water infused with herbs that are obtainable for this purpose.
The form of the suction cup is used by fire if it is such:
siece,124:nagre (and itcumasblei and ituponse towage thefaire.
And let there be fire, burning fiercely so it does not cut the patient's skin when placing it on their limb.
and have in mind a thousandth of an arrow or iron rod, to place a splint upon the injury.
and for them all sizes according to diseases and the nature of those who have them.
for children's suction cups are different from those of adults, and thin people differ from plump ones.
And must one place this suction cup upon the limb?
take the splint or some liniment, and place it between the rod with the suction cup on it, where the suction cup is located. so that the light may be at the base of the suction cup, it does not burn the patient's flesh.
and then place it upon the limb, and you must keep it pressed against the wound that we have described, so that when they see it swelling, they remove the suction cup.
and take up some liniment if you deem fit, and renew it often if you have experience.
In the suction cup which is treated for coughing fits and nowadayer has neither rod nor puncture, it is not used unless when the airways are clear, and only placed upon the limb briefly.
And this is its form:
Suction cups are used only where there is a need to place them for small injuries such as in the lips and gums, and similar things. and from their skin removed as if they bleed or not, and similar things;
and the quality of its use is that when it treats those small injuries which are moist and smooth in appearance, you apply it.
and you place some powder on it if they are moist and smooth, provided they do not have any swelling inside. and then be wise in cautery and suction cups, then rub the limb so much that it is red, and place on small injuries.
and it is suitable for the following sentence from which wei desires deffort of cest togear:
:er. In the ons.tice tiaire of eras. Forstère, the, and aimer. Ivoulution in itiou: ices (itace deure, cestira and thennage, leu's century:esurjac:age.
And if his hair is healthy too much after the wound of the blood from the heart, and take a cold linen cloth on it and put it over, until the bleeding stops.
And if there are many wounds, he puts upon it crushed vitriol or salve and similar things, until they are stopped bleeding.
And you put it on the wounds covered with flies' feet and let them dry at that place, so they will now stay.
And if you have more knowledge about it, then use other salves.
And if the wounds do not take to it, then you should rub the skin with fresh blood, or you can prick it until they stop bleeding. And then put it on again so that they smell the fresh blood right away, and if they start bleeding again.
And when you see that they are smoking (implying a wound with foul odor), then powder them slightly with ash and fine clay or charred wood ashes, so it will be better now.
This line is indicating the beginning of a section or text titled "The Book of Dislocations," which suggests that the content discussed would relate to treatments for dislocated joints and other injuries, consistent with medieval medical practices. It's likely referring to an Old French text discussing such medical conditions from the 12th century.
And this is necessary to the art of medicine often, and the healing of dislocation and extraction.
Cut, son child, that the wise man does not get knowledge from this chapter, which he has never seen in any ancient books or letters.
And because of this reason, the study is extradited to our land, for I found none worthy.
And knoweth I nothing at all, for by the study of ancient books^2, or so it hath been in my examination that I have touched upon the art, and through trial and life's accustomed ways.
And I unto thee in this chapter have set down what herein is contained, and to the end have penned it; plainly portraying the forms of the animals aforementioned, as 'twas done in these xx previous chapters.
It hence cometh that we declare the prologue of this tome's verities and chapters with their sundry significations set forth, awaiting upon verdant vistas, so they who have tested may learn and teach this noble art to others.
I say that when any breech or dislocation or twistings or quaking occurs, it requires that thou hastest to heal both sides of the maladie with a just measure^3; if no part be wholly whole, as frail in strength, fierce in tempests, or worn by want of years.
Or should the limb be overly cold or exceedingly frigid; and menace frosted jousts^4, it is to know those of chilly clime, as rarefied races and creatures light on flesh, eschewing wine' Writings: Avoid rich meats that fill one’s sinews until certainty in ambulate without limb complaint or swelling surge; then shall we remedy the maladies with prompt governance of previous practices used.
And when the bone bruised begins to mend, it commands that we feed the maladie of meats that make great grumbling, or possess viscosity, as one who eats bread well-boiled in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and flesh from any beast^5. And nowhere should be shown to soulders de ceulx.
And you must know that the bone fragments of old and decayed ones cannot be well taken back or joined according to their nature, nor those who are too soft like the bones of very young children.
But do not cure the broken bone. Instead, take large thorns that move and join the limb together as it was before; and for this reason, he must not work on it in any way, and therefore needs to eat heavy meats, just like we have said.
And you know that fractures occur in various ways.
For the main break is different from a simple break, or of the leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all the ways in which a break can occur. For he has a break that goes to the arrow, and another one when sharpening, just like the tip of a quill for writing.
For he has a break that goes to the arrow, and another one when sharpening, just like the tip of a quill for writing. And if there is a break with an open wound, and a break that involves a tiny crack.
And each method has its own treatment, and its specific instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings upon it.
And is considered the bone fracture by the fact that the edges are twisted and well apart, and sometimes pressed with the hand.
And when there is no twisting involved nor any pain at all, then there is no fracture.
But it can still have twisting, crack, or a small break. If there is no need for you to move it with your hands, but use medicines that come after here, and then restrain it gently now.
And you know that the break involving an arrow, and its two separated parts, he must now put them back to their original position, so as not to loosen the wound.
And if there is an arrowhead that comes in, it should leave no day until the arrowheads are soothed. Then you put it back to its original position so that you can move and adjust it easily, knowing that the restoration of his bone is easier than in those cases where pieces are involved. Then apply gentle pressure as required.
And if the bone has pieces broken off, whether it be two parts separated, whether by hands or fingers, or from one small limb, or from strings, or a string and your hand;
And put the limb according to its natural form, so that when pieces from both members are deformed by all means of restoration, you can move and adjust them as they need. But make sure your work does not cause further injury or pain to the patient.
And adjust the two fragments of bone according to their best forms.
And it is well with the hand if you seem to move moderately so as they do in their medical work: and contracts of the member, as we have said.
: laisser andere a cest anvil. Iesmeans the morfaire. And commanded him to make sure that no pain is felt by the limbs. And when there is no pain felt, then it is not the case, and he must put them in part disposition so that they do not feel any pain.
And when there is no pain felt, then it is not the case, and he must put them in part disposition so that they do not feel any pain. and keep him straightly so that twistedness does not return when he has been restored.
and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I have told you.
Notice that the broken limbs are diverse in size and shape.
For he has small limbs like flaxen and fine, as it requires wrapping them in soft, finely woven linens.
and those who are large like cuff and leg, as it requires wrapping in thick, sturdy bandages. For the wide bandages embrace the whole big member, holding them uniformly so there is no fracture.
then the ligatures are tightly tied, three or four turns according to the limb, and I hold my hand a little on the entire bandage, then up above the fracture and lessen the tension, so that the fracture gradually moves away.
and loosen the bandage a little bit and a little bit, as long as you protect a large part of the healthy bone, then repeat another bandage, and tighten it again around the fractured limb.
then return to the area above the fracture, and lessen the tension slightly, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first part upwards of the bandage.
and place between the ligatures of linen or soft fabrics so that they are all uniform, then tie it again with another bandage, and then place well-fitted supports on top if there is an abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, put something soothing on it that relieves the inflammation and reduces swelling, and let it heal for some time.
and strain it against the supports, and make of a wide canine wires, or from fir, and made according to this form.
Carthor: theu in ous: "causes d'in French forcause, à meauthoriz: Old English fromme: lege parchief.
:througher laisser. :cum le genere from l'estirre tacute de:savage (itenergates, a peuke encewomane apeirage from theaterre de ceare,duretracteriefresine iten itseignessence of bothro, tocumbra, healex :16;sacreuxeface:nacre.
Then hold it steady on the stakes just like you did in the first case, then tie above an arrow shaft, as you have done in the first case.
Then it is drawn outwards, and then inwards; and it must be made thin, not too thick nor too fine, and of flaxen material.
For if the thread is thick like I want those folk who make their strings out of linen to do so, and it's great error because the loop cannot be equal if it's too delicate, and there should still not be less than double the distance between each stake.
And if the patient's pain is intensified by the nails on the stakes after straightening them in their healthy places, then you should hammer them with flaxen or shredded linen there so that it does not break.
When the wound is with the bruise and it's broken, I will tell you about the treatment after that.
And it must not be straightened out all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it must not be tied with stakes until after 2 or 3 years or more depending on your discretion and skill in incision.
And this is the manner of ancient implants for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: and do you take flour that holds in the walls of a millstone, mix it with an abundance of eggs, make this composition neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, as this is the common way of restoring fractures to various positions, and mainly for women and children, because it's not too hot or too cold.
Another method for repairing fractures and dislocations is to take abareis (a type of resin), ladania (a medicinal substance derived from plants), olive oil, and gum tragacanth in an amount of 10 parts; mirrè (myrtle) and aloes in an approximate quantity of 5 parts each; seven theriac (an ancient medical preparation); and powder it all together with honey mixed with wax. The condition of the mixture is hot, so this paste should be used for such a repair, as its composition is good, and repairs broken bones promptly, and benefits many people.
Another way to dislocate by twisting: take a muddle and stir vigorously, with .X. quantity; myrrh and aloe, with .VII. quantity; acacia wood VI. quantity; iron arrow .X. quantity, and grind well, and coat with water or abundance of oil, and administer.
Another way to dislocate joints and separate the bones of their hair, and alleviate the pain that is suffered, and cut into the bone, and heat a new linen piece in oil, and place it on the bone. These splints do not restore completely, but they are good for easing intense pain from an injury, and treating specifically dental pain.
Another way to realign broken bones: take dry leaves of fig tree and dried leaves of Staphysaginum terrestris, grind them together, and make an emplant.
Another way to restore the break in bone and relieve remaining pain from the injury. Take root of myrrh, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour, one part each; grind them together, coat with wine, and apply to members that are swollen, or use moist water-soaked coriander leaves, or just plain water, for treatment.
Another way beyond the first concerning when aplacement (presumed typo for "aposteme" - restoration) is required due to joint injury. Take root of myrrh, seeds of flax, bark, mallow sap, and violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; grind them together, coat with saline water or sweet water, or wine according to the temperature of the limb and rest.
In his book, it says that they do not place it on the broken member for restoration because some use a mixture of wax and oil; however, there is nothing else more suitable than two or three times as soft or hard.
And it seems that Galen must place on the broken member for restoration, slightly warm things as we have said: myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things; in other words, those materials mentioned previously.
⁠line: Etienne.
s. :age, soffre of tongue: (bien a lui.
And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, restlessness, swelling, if you hasten, and loosen, and put pressure on the inflamed area now; and take linen legier, and damp sea sponge, and immerse in water, and raise the joint, until the itching ceases, and pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put it on dry linen, moistened with water or oil roses, and tie it up securely until you are certain there is no bleeding from the wound.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and ease the pain, then resume gentle pressure, and apply a little heat, and do not tighten it as much as before; and gradually until it is sound again.
And if bleeding and bruising and swelling are evident at the wound site, and you know how to apply heat and bandage, then resume as you did initially when there was no improvement.
And if there is no sign of the previously mentioned issues in the limb, then loosen it only after 2 to 3 or 4 days, or at most 5, depending on what is observed, until the breakage subsides and the misalignment approaches its original position.
But the restraint should not be more than initially applied, and it swells its flesh as I have previously mentioned; if you see that the joint is dryer than expected, this indicates that no relief can come. Rise the warm water poured from a jug every time you loosen it, and do this for each day, and remove some of the bandage.
By this work, correct the numbness in the limb and hasten whatever the fool doctor tries to restore it distorted: that is bad, and if there are doubts about such procedures, I see nothing else but weakness and dealing with wounds carefully.
From various methods of dislocation There are many methods of dislocations and various forms, and the causes are distinguished. (Note: This line appears to be a continuation or related content from the preceding text discussing different types of dislocations.)
because it has dislocations caused by sword blows, and the collar bone breaks all along its length where it passes under the bone, just as in a haunch or fracture; therefore, this type of dislocation is called "haughure" (Note: This line seems to be describing one specific type of dislocation resulting from a blow with a sword.)
Or the sword thrusts through too much force and is called this type of dislocation "absolute"; and it refers to these types of injuries, large or small. (Note: This line appears to continue describing another specific type of dislocation caused by a sword thrust.)
And if it has been pierced or pierced, or fractured at the hip bone, or fallen from the hip socket, or other similar things. (Note: This line seems to continue listing various injuries that could occur in conjunction with dislocations.)
And if it has continuous displacement, which approaches the tablecloth that is on top of the bone or underneayer, and this wound is large or small. (Note: This line appears to be describing a scenario where there is a continuous dislocation affecting either beneath or above the bone, referring to the size of the wound.)
Ondes devises deslo premeraillus. A:meaimeurs d'ailer,atavre enmgoullie lai: iewsesume of thegros laitinseu on :12. Elyse.iocursalaside lair. Isole ous.
And if the wound is made by a stab of sword, or fall, or something else, and it inserts the lower piece of bone into it, and its edges are as they are when the blacksmith pierces below the hearths; if it enters between the pieces there.
And this happens more under those who have wet bones like in children's cases;
And it happens in all these ways of fracture where small fragments are displaced as if they were, and I will speak about it on the subject.
And we know all kinds of fractures caused by the removal from them, and inquests into them, and by the corrupted one that is near them;
The hair-like appearance is considered by this that when the bone is discovered and rubbed over it, if it reveals a black break;
In the treatment of the breakage, take into account all bad effects from it and if you see no malicious accident, such as vomiting of pus, loss of understanding (encephalitis), extension, swelling (papules), fever with aqua-like quality, the hairs coming out and turning red, hands becoming inflamed, and other similar states in various dispositions; it cannot be healed if there is doubt.
And if you see no apparent dangerous accident, and you hope for recovery, then it begins the healing process;
And when the vein arrives first at you and it's winter, there is an obligation to preserve the bone before the fourteenth day after its dislodgement;
And if it is so, and you hasten to preserve the bone before the seventh day, then the wound becomes corrupted on the bone's surface, and such accidents as we have mentioned;
And if the bone fracture occurs so close to the skull that it covers the brain, then you must cut into the cracked part in this way: and ensure that you protect the head of the patient who is in great pain, and investigate the broken bone in all ways that you can, and on the face of the wound as soft as possible.
And if the blood flow occurs when discovering the bone, or making an incision, it is necessary that you wrap the wound in linen dipped in oil roses. And let the wound rest until the cuts are calmed down, and be assured of bleeding from the bone; then begin to work on the bone according to .ij. procedures of this practice: one procedure is that you coat with clay in a narrow area before it forms like this:
And then perform another greater treatment than the first one.
And the second method is that you have various techniques at hand, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made of iron, and in their application do not cause pain to the head.
And if the bone is hard and sturdy, it must be pierced through accordingly so that you administer treatments with care, ensuring they do not extend beyond the bone's edge or test; and you should have more than .i., in order to ensure each joint moves freely from the center of the bone outward, leaving a margin or .i. circle around it where the tip does not penetrate further into the bone; and there must be more, so that each side of the test is freed from its edge with all treatments, and this takes on form in ..ij. treatment methods:
The quality of performing through the bone with .i. treatment is that you apply it to the bone, and then adjust it backward until you know whether the bone has been pierced; then reapply the treatment in another place afterwards, and so do everything around it, then take an incisive blade at the distance of the bone between the cuts, and do this more subtly than possible, and quickly as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or any one of your tools that has been used, such as tongs, pincers; and ensure that you do not touch the brain or skull.
And when you have pierced the bone and cut, it is necessary that you create an apparatus which seems like a small incisor blade, but it must be more flexible and subtler than the other scalpel.
le mesures devisage:sesme sourrele:esui.iluminautemain. I'sang, and theorise.a century. Ander. A:nagacharm itchief asclevelsandur disease :resistantlengraisse.
And the other way of practice is what Galen calls it, which is more sorcery; and he spoke much about it, and that is his word. It is necessary that you remove a part of the bone, whether it be an open fracture, so that when you have found this part, then with the head of this lenticular incision, because from here its shape comes about:
And do not cut a part off, but it is in .ij. sides, so that the cutting goes towards the bone; then with a small hammer placed on top, you strike lightly all around the bone, and be careful of what lies below it:
If it clings to the bone, then move the bone lightly, because it is well known that the bone causes harm and fear:
And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to below, and the bone is cut so much above, and it has small fragments, then cover again that roughness, and remove the scales with a subtle blade of which you must have various quantities in order to provide each layer as most suitable, according to the work and shape of the fracture:
If in front of great blades, and after more subtle ones, and never stop doing so much until it is done well:
In each other delicate cuts and fractures, it is necessary that you provide according to its proper arrangement; and this is something not repaid by those who have put their study into this art:
And if the wound is discovered, it is necessary that you provide one tow of linen depending on the amount of the wound, and apply oil roselle to it, and put it over the wound: Then take another towel doubled in .ij. or .iij., and moisten it with wine and rosette oil, and place it on top of the first towel; do this more lightly than you can so that you do not overload the wound, then apply above a second layer, and do not press it too hard that only the plaque is healed:
And leave it for .i. day or .ij., as long as the apatients are calmed down, then remove it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, flour, powdered herbs, and incense ash, and other similar things; make powders from these things and place them on the wound, and after that you will administer monofilamentous medicines without bites:
And then make sure the wound is well cleaned, so that there is not any blood clotting, and they will hurt him much, for when a fracture heel appears above the skin, for it hurts, and l’esprit, por laisse legee: les maund.
:mein oun, eithen ofte itheu decae anderence of thees:ces ailves, CEJace.
And if black blood does not come through for the sake of medicine that has power, it requires you to prescribe one part of honey, and two parts of rose oil and a little linen cloth, and put it under the sinew. Then the treatment for curing such methods that he covers, as long as he remains healthy.
Cutting that sometimes are broken above the neck, or one by one, because they are joints; and these below are cartilaginous, and do not break, if not bent or twisted, and then he remains healthy.
And if one of the joints is broken, it requires you to insert a small stitch or suture into the neck and place that fracture within your index finger indication, and then apply pressure on the wound until it regains its natural shape. And do this ligaturement, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain due to your work.
And if the fracture is above the joint and cannot come to a stable position, it requires you to insert something substantial at the top of an iron rod.
And if the fracture is in one of those joints, repair it again, and hurry to restore its initial condition as soon as possible if you can.
But if not after the seventh or the twelfnieth attempt when the wound is healed, at that point try to tie a piece of linen cloth on the joint's neck, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you tie other pieces of cloth to the other parts if the fracture is there; and make them as thick as they fill up the joint's openings.
And they say that restorators must wash the cloths with wool and change them every day. I don't think this is well, but it requires making the cloths from sheepskin and powdered mill; then leave the tape until the bones are set and the cartilages hardened.
And never put down feathers of goose in the linen cloths on the joints, and if there is one loose sheet of fabric holding it together and holds the fracture, blow air between the maladies; or make such a device that you can see with your eyes.
And if the abscess comes to a joint as you work on it, put cauterization or cotton soaked in rose oil, or just a little of diatomaceous earth.
And if the abscess does not come to a joint, then apply plaster made of flour and incense powder mixed with sheepskin, put it under pressure bandages, and do not tie the neck.
And if the shoulder blade is broken in small pieces, and it has been shattered into tiny fragments, then you must take out the fragment as large stones, and treat various unnatural things about this fracture, and welding, as one would do with suitable stones and ointments;
And if there is no hole in the shoulder blade at all, then its treatment for tenting, and he applies linen bandages until it becomes healthy.
Of the procedure of the jawbone
When the jawbone is cut open and it has no pre-existing wound, and its breakage occurs so subtly that it's not broken into two pieces, because there are no cavities within where bone marrow may be present, then if one knows of such a delicate situation, they handle it lightly.
It is required that if the breakage occurs in the right part of the jawbone, you place your thumb on the tender side; and if the breakage is in the left part of the jawbone, then you put your right hand's thumb inside it gently, move the broken piece lightly with the other hand, and apply pressure equally.
And if the breakage of the jawbone is displaced into the midline (MJD), it is required that you apply a gradual extension to this part so that it remains level.
And if there is a commotion involving the teeth or when performing the operation, using threads of gold, silver, or silk, then place ceramic plates on the fractured jawbone and put one double draped cloth over it; and position that same double drape to cover the mandible with either an evenly-made large piece of leather or a similarly sized piece of cuir, wide and lengthy according to the shape of the mandible, and lay it on the patient so they can rest, and instruct the patient to let the hair grow long and uneven; and if the roots come out at the base, hold the eyes steady until they grow.
And if the figure changes afterward, and it shifts for a month, then reset it to its original state; and place a pound of fine flour mixed with wool or finely milled wheat on top of the fractured jawbone; and spread over this clot, and every time the patient'e injury has been healed in three months.
Whatsobre: Butte deu :cumme esurre ofme desmeansume iefsesus.
And if there is a break and wound together, treat it with no bone in the healing process; so subtly that the surrounding muscles can recover quickly.
And if the wound is narrowed, enlarge it with fluids according to your necessity.
And once you have all these bone fragments intact and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, place over it one of these easily recoverable supports to tighten the area until it heals completely.
of the limb The limb breaks more than once in front of the shoulder, towards the scapula, and the dislocation occurs according to two movements: either it is displaced and separated by .ij., or there are pieces, making it easier to restore; or it has a dislocation with wound.
And the operations are when there is dislocation with wound, and you have .ij. assistants who will heat the support that feels the displaced limb; and others extend the column towards the affected area; then set equal the dislocation back to its place so it conforms as it should, without any appearance or deformity.
And if you have the need to extend further, place on the patient's shoulder a round cloth or linen, according to your necessity; and gently handle the limb and hold the support in your hand so that you put the dislocation back into its proper position as it should be.
And if you cannot remove the chief of the limb to the side because it has grown inward, then it is necessary that the patient be left sitting on his chair; and place over the shoulder .i. cushion, and have your assistants hold the shoulder downwards until the bones of the dislocation are raised.
And then apply the dislocation to its place, and if you break them up, so that they are placed lightly, and since no bone can join any incision of yours, but that thou put it on the shoulder blades.
And it resembles a spoon, and is not crooked, and should also be wide according to the size of the bone and the strength of the wound; and there are two joints, just like you see, and one large, and the other narrow, as the pattern of the wound that you have made when you treated the bones.
And when you are sure of the puncture, if it covers the wound, and the pattern is small, or if you doubt the puncture, if the dressing and bandages cover the wound according to its quantity.
And if the puncture is inside a joint (aposteme chaus), then apply one dressing soaked in oil roses and silk and lay it on top.
The discomfort of the bone where it feels pain and sensitivity, you should place on top of the bone a plaster made from powdered millet and ash of oak, laying several layers over it, and then affix an arrow with this plaster if you have experience; Then take a very thick bandage of one palm wide, then apply two layers of dressing and plaster on it, and the plaster. Take an arrow slightly smaller than three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, ensuring that the tip of the bandage hangs down; Iesus. Etienne de cil verra ainsenges: "
And let the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps a little side bone under the shoulder, to raise the shoulder joint up; this lessens the break of the muscle by aligning the shoulder blade, or you tie the arm to the collarbone, so that no worsening occurs within twenty years.
Then resume the exercise if you see fit, and restrain and let it continue as long as it is restored; and it will be restored within twenty-seven years at most for no one.
The break of the shoulder blade.
Very often the shoulder breaks or widens without pain and is not caused by any injury; if it is uncovered according to the shape of the fracture, and set firmly with a lot of lime powder and lightweight rods, placed under a wide board twice as wide as the shoulder, so that no movement occurs within its joints, and then tighten firmly so the board stays in place, watching the connection every day; and whenever it weakens, if you tighten again and keep the board aligned with the shoulder when it is loose, the shoulder will be restored to forty years or forty-five at most. When these numbers are completed, release the patient and get up carefully because this isn't bone that moves heavily.
And if a fragment of the bone is found before it moves down, and does not go into the joint, then set it up there, and treat the bone as we have said in the treatment of the dislocation at the joint site; gently reduce it.
The dislocation of both pieces.
The pieces are never broken without pain, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks down in the joints, and he feels great pain, lack of anything else besides that, vomiting blood, and opening up the fractured bones in his shoulder, and then there is a very bad feeling.
nature.
Of the dislocation of the shoulders
Seizures of the shoulder dislocation do not occur because they are located behind the back and in the upper part, and they only fall due to their greasy nature; and it hurts them greatly when examined.
And the resetting is that you must align the dislocation just like it should; and then apply a splint, and immobilize with a stretcher, if you are experienced in this.
And if the shoulder dislocation is descending inwards, it causes the patient great pain and weakness, just like with pleurisy; for the bone pushes against the skin, and at first he vomits blood and has severe bleeding, which is a serious illness, and the old ones used to do much harm.
And if there are those who say that it should be administered foods that swell the stomach in order to push out the dislocation.
We do not do such things; if there are abscesses that have formed, they cannot be removed unless they come out themselves. And if they have come forth, then it is healthy.
And they say that no one puts vacuums on the surface, to suction deep, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the vacuum will draw out unnecessary substances from the joint due to its weak positioning.
And they say that no one should cover the surface of the joint with soft linen soaked in hot oil, and put bandages between the shoulders to keep the dislocation straight, then it must be treated for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone pushing against the skin, and there is doubt in him about it, then it must be split along the dislocated shoulder joint, and put an instrument to hold the wound; and therefore you must cut into the bone and drain it carefully, and then suture the large lacerations of the wound, if they are great, and treat with splints until healed. And if abscesses come out, cover them with moistened linens soaked in rose oil and put on over the joint; and care for this while you must also keep him lying down wherever the abscess should come out, until it is cured.
of the dislocation of the neck
There has never been a dislocation of the vertebrae in the backbone, and it rarely falls; and also at the spinal column. And when this happens to no one and you know whether it will be healed or not, if you see his hands swollen and withered and lifeless and unable to move or extend them, and if you pierce them with a needle, then they do not hurt; realize that such conditions are fatal in many cases, and if the joint is silent and feels well when it is stretched and moved, so you know that the shoulder joint is safe, and that the dislocation should be cured, provided you administer treatment.
Si leu li's esformentre demeing, au jalbais :li les ferme :iurne of theur la terre parisles surtracteur. Neuf lainre desorle tolkinejne juridre toulure loues:nelsanfeelthejourne ofre:
And if this accident does not affect him, then it is a lighter matter.
And if the treatment is that you apply cautery to it when there is an abscess under a thorn or in fresh cow's milk, so long as he remains calm; then place him on one of the comfortable restraining supports and bind his wound with a bandage, and command the patient to rest in such a way that he does not sleep on the part where he feels pain, until he is completely recovered. And if any bone fragments dislodge, it must be covered with the cloth; then remove the bone, and if there is a large wound, dress it with a bandage, and treat it by ointment-anointing until healing occurs; and when his "kowe" knee joints are broken, call them "kneecaps", and you must push your bag (medicine) in your left hand toward the right one according to your practice, then place the restraining board and pillow, if it suits you. Then bind him up, and if a bone fragment dislodges, remove it together with the bone and treat the wound until healed.
from the fracture of the hip bone
It happens infrequently that the hip bone is fractured, and if it does happen, there's usually only a slight diminution at the top; then press down far, and let it descend to the pubic symphysis, and it comes to the patient's painful area near the joint, and swelling occurs where the bone has been fractured.
And the restoration is that you stretch your hand over it as long as it is extended due to the fracture; and you determine what type of fracture it is and its shape; and if the fracture is near the top, place such a fracture there with natural form until it heals.
And if the fracture is long or it descends to the abdomen, then let the patient lie on his belly until the restoration of that fracture occurs. And when you have placed it on the board, then place it under a wooden or metal frame, and bind the fracture so that it does not move; and take care of the wound with bandages, until healing occurs.
And command the patient sleep on its bone in his sancen "leu. Etrege deus les cheveis en laorein: Laves ceulz deservant: Etude, si esturant sesenees itener: I'sure, eti vair.
:seies ciates: Audeen dementures ousu coulorex.commeine deurein (a soarjour les che:nose. Latrein ceintures lignat de la, to theiss :pourcesent: a corps:resignes.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder-girdle is what lies between the costal and lumbar parts of the spine, and if it is dislocated, then one must restore it according to one of these two methods: the first being that you take a large piece of moistened earth, following this form:
And let the shoulders and limbs be raised, and look at the pain in that place; then he cuts down his broken arm on the wood until it bends to the side, and places a wedge of wood under it, so as to extend its length by some weighty object or objects which are used therein. Then put back the dislocation evenly with his hands together, until the dislocation returns in the same way as required.
And the other way is that it is believed to place the pain on its hilt-piece, and hold the arm by its collar, then instruct some ministers to heat those parts which are at the dislocation of his hands, and others to heat every limb, extending each in its respective part.
And if you see that the extraction is more advanced, then restrict a limb around the dislocation, and under the dislocation, and extend each minister to their respective part. And if the dislocation is near the chief of the spine, it requires placing one piece moistened in the area between the spine and the dislocation, another towards the costal part, above the dislocation; and likewise, if the dislocation is toward the costal part, then to move gently, as much labor until the dislocation returns in its original position under the spine and along the costal part; then place it evenly, just as required, and bind securely so that there are no movements towards it.
And if the bandages come off, do not restrain it any further for nine years, and place a moistened linen underneath and above with ointment so long as the bandages are at ease; then unbind and bind in the manner of binding such that you put an elevating board on the dislocation, then gathering up the arm to the sling or to the chest, and place your hand over the spine or breastbone; and fasten the sling, and rebound the arm from the sling, so that the arm is kept steady without anything preventing it, whether a bone moves or not.
If you doubt that the bone is moving, then use a larger and stronger pillars one by one, and each of those pillars such that it passes over the dislocation; and Ivjourfait, then binds as said. Iiij.
And if you see the seat of the stones, and tightening, as we have said, when restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the puncture wound heals, let it stay joined for seven days as we have said; then observe every three years the knot that does not swell at the joint or the discomfort cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. And if the patient, as we have said.
And if such accidents do not occur within two years or more, and the maladies lie on his back, and have hands in his stomach; and place an equal piece of wool under the splint, and observe every hour for a day when the broken limb's figure does not move or become soft, if healing by virtue of medicine occurs and it gives flesh as we have previously mentioned, so that the flesh is first subtly; and whenever starting to recover, it becomes heavy. And it is customary that the splint and leg must be taken apart in 140 days, and therefore you should remove and administer baths and ointments for healing the wound. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, it may last one year or more.
From the break of the arm
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "hammer" (fistula), where one is small and it is that which holds the head; and the other is large, and it is those within it; by chance the hammer breaks only the larger or the smaller, or both together.
When the smaller hammer (fistula) is fractured, treatment is easy, and healing occurs; but when the larger one is broken, it indicates poor healing, and it is more compressed than when both are broken together. If only the smaller hammer is fractured, then it requires relatively mild extension of movement, and application of equal pressure.
And if it is the larger hammer (fistula), then it must be extended more strongly; and elongate at one point, and increase the head of the hand higher than the others, and lower the smaller ones down below, and bind them tightly under themselves, and a woolen cushion over them taller in front of it so that no pain will be suffered by them; then extend the ministers to the arm at the part near the hand or another joint, and other assistants on top. Then place the bandages accordingly to its better shape.
And if in the breakage there are pieces, put each one to its place, and if there is no danger that holds back the key, then you do not restore it to its place, but make on top of it and consult with the healer, as we have said before.
And if there is an injury in the breakage, I spoke to the individual physician about it; take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the repair the abscesses are relieved by pressing with a rosette made of olive oil and beeswax, not too hard or too soft; then press gently on top, until the abscesses are soothed. Then the physician applies the powder mixture with abundant honey, places it in the wound, making the plate larger than others if necessary; and ensures that the plate has at least two pieces or arms placed in different positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or both; pressing more on top of the fracture rather than elsewhere, and not moving it too much each day, as I said to the individual physician; and ensure the rosettes are neither hard nor soft, and use linen threads that are neither too thick nor too thin, as we have mentioned. Then heal the limb and its tendons after some time. And if any accident happens to the member, as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary to bathe the member with warm water until the itching subsides; then let the limb not be too narrowly rested. Then resume the tension, and if the tendons are weakened and the bone moistened, like this matter, address it accordingly.
And if the nasal mucus cannot come to the member because it is too hard; then soften it slightly and leave it for some days, until the nasal mucus comes out, and then tighten again.
: lexinjour deccle laisser. The:se.
Of the dislocation of the hand
We see that on the back of the hand and we often encounter few fractures, and it only leads to numerous bends.
And when the hand's plantar (sole) surface is fractured or bent, it must be examined carefully and held straightly in front of him; then he extends his hand over a laid-out cloth and aligns the broken bones as evenly as possible until they are well joined; and he applies plaster and splints where there is no movement, and then places a support according to the size of the wound; and it is wrapped in one linen sheet.
And if the fracture is on the edge of the sole, it makes a piece of linen strip; and instructs the patient to wrap his broken sole with this linen strip; then he wraps a long linen strip around it, and also secures the support bandage with an adequate thickness similar to that used for the sole' mantle, and fastens it in such a manner as it requires.
And if the fracture is in the dorsal (top) part of the hand, it must place a support bandage on it; and another one inside the plantar surface, so that the hands are elevated and straight, then binds all around the two sides of the hand firmly.
And if the fracture does not belong to any of these categories, it is a dislocation, and he must place it in an even position; and straps with the plantar surface, and when you see there is no movement, then places a straight small board to elevate the dislocation and prevent it from moving; and if the fracture belongs to any of the other fingers (other than index or middle), he must place it in an even position, and tie the bandage with the corresponding finger that follows. Either binds all together, which is strong enough, or places a support board as for a dislocation; then preserves in restoration and treatment until such time as they come out again, according to what I have said.
And if the fracture is on the wrist (cuisse in Old French), it must be placed in an even position; then straps are used with the plantar surface of the hand, and when there is no movement observed, a straight small board is utilized to elevate the dislocation and prevent its mobility. If the fracture is found on any other finger besides the index or middle, it should be properly aligned; in such cases, bandaging is applied with the adjacent finger as support. The hand can be securely bound, ensuring strength, or a board similar to one used for dislocation. Conservation and treatment continue until movement occurs again, consistent with earlier observations.
The shoulder's bone is often fractured, and it can be seen clearly when she turns both forward and backward; and the healing consists of two parts: one above the fracture, and another below. And then there is great pain in his face, and he extends each of his limbs equally to its corresponding part; and it's when the fracture has penetrated into the bone.
If the fracture is close to the root of the shoulder blade, then one set of limbs towards the point of impact, and another set internally near the fracture; and if it's also nearby the genitals, there should be a corresponding extension downward from the penis. Then attach the brace evenly on both sides of his shoulders, as long as he is in accordance with his natural figure, and then apply pressure to stabilize, ensuring that such movement does not return.
And if there is an accompanying swelling, let it be soothed first then return to your work and treatment; the binding is made in two parts. It is required that you wrap around the fracture in a thick double band made of either two or three strips; above the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel touches the root of the navel, and stretch a long strip between the shoulder blade and the leg near the groin, beneath the genitals there; then bend the strip upwards, over the bandage placed on the fracture. Then you place stones or sticks under the foot' mantle-covered area of the thigh bone; apply eight layers of fabric covering the joint between leg and shoulder; proceed with binding in two or three placements above the fracture; as it approaches further from the fracture, lessen the tension. Then move the strips wrapped around both legs that you have placed between the thigh and shoulder to below the chief strip there; continue until away from the point of injury, and if the pressure does not move from its position, then leave it as such, then check to see whether any swelling or other symptoms reappear.
And if it happens, let him dislocate and address what comes to him as we have often said; and if he has pieces of bone that are grasped, he must know whether he can pull them out or not; and if he cannot, then he must cut into the joint, and extract it, and treat it as we have often said, until it is healthy.
And never has the kneecap been broken in this way as it is when setting a shoulder splint or arm brace; all other ways of restoration made no difference to the patient's severe pain.
You know that the kneecap has been restored in one year, or less than a year, or more than a year, depending on the various individual differences.
from the knee joint
It is known that in the knee joint there are few breaks, but it bends many times; and if it does break, then it's either a fracture or an open wound, and happens at any injury, and one feels pain well when injured.
And the restoration is such that it puts back whatever is loose at its proper place, as long as it can be put together again; then set up an implant or peg, and if you have experience with it, apply it as it must be done, and prepare all other fracture arrangements we mentioned in our treatises for such cases where a cast fits perfectly. Then for each accident what he needs to do until he is healthy again.
from a break in the leg
It is known that in the leg there are two bones, one called 'mastodon' not by chance and the other 'musket'; and all other fractures as they occur in the arm are treated similarly to a shoulder injury, and therefore the restoration is done in much the same way for these injuries, and the operations are also quite similar.
And if both bones are broken in pieces, turn the leg on all sides.
And if the small bone is broken in pieces, turn it forward.
And if the large bone is broken in pieces, he feels great pain and can see it well; then turn around him. But first extend his leg; place the stretrances evenly, and bind them all together; however, as long as the fracture is ugly and there are many small pieces of the break, and the extension is smaller and lighter than usual, and align it according to its nature.
:
Of the break of bone so frail
The ankle does not come from a fracture, but the fragile bones seldom experience such breakage and only with minimal movements do they suffer harm.
And if the delicate bones experience such fractures and you see them bulging against each other; they lie so malformed on the ground like if they were trying to fly, then lift your foot onto their side, now let the bone rise up, pressing it until it returns in its joints; place a hammer and nails above, and put small screws underneayer of the leg, restrain the limb according to need, and wrap it with layers of cloth, along with other things you are familiar with.
And if three or four years pass by, dislocate the ligament because you will find the bones either equal in size, whether fractured or displaced.
And if there are no bone fragments to repair, restore them as we previously discussed for the hands; then set up a splint according to the length of each fragment and make it slightly wider than needed, place that small cloth on the patient'inasplintiton; and if there are two or three fragments broken, position a corresponding splint based on its size underneath the cloth covering the area, wrap it in one sheet of linen, restrain the limb accordingly; and keep the head slightly elevated above the bottom part of the splint, ensuring good ventilation for the patient's foot.
And it is imperative that you do not forget the other treatments we have mentioned for similar injuries; and in every case, act accordingly to what has been prescribed.
Of the fracture of the foot bone.
And if the foot bone of a woman is fractured, make it as large as possible and then incline it to her back part, securing it with a belt; fill the wound cavity, and so forth: if after three or four years. And when you see the breakage appears restored, and put a bladder of sheep will beast in that place, and make envelloigne comens les bois fracture desuor.
And when the bone of the shoulder blade is broken for man or woman, and it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder; and these subsequent fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and skill, and understand my book. For the break signifies in several ways the right path of restoration: that is why.
In the vein, when it is broken, take a bird's throat and bind the vein; then wrap it in cloth, and let it rest for two or three years until it heals quickly.
of a break with wound
It is required for those who have a break with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the shoulder blade or the shoulder joint, that they be cured immediately, as our examples show.
And if the wound is healed, then re-injection of vitriol, if you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the break in that same hour or day, when the abscess does not appear again.
And if the abscess appears again, then leave the restoration for another new day until it is calmed down, and do not interfinate for a year or quarter thereafter, because you will bring in bad luck.
And if the bone is broken and exposed through an opening, it requires that you apply it gently with your hands, extending only slightly.
And if the extension does not assist you in applying it evenly with your hands, then take this instrument made of iron, which is 1.5 to 2.5 times long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and because it's a matter of expertise that he impregnate .3 or .4 depending on what each case requires in each treatment of fracture; and whether it's round and thick enough so that it does not collapse at all under pressure with your work.
And it is called "palanquin", so that the shoulder joints are placed on top of the bone exposed; and put it once, so that they are equal to one another. And if the fracture is subtle, and the strain cannot well grasp the bone, so covien that you place the top part of the bone, as long as he has power.
surex:arece devises (10ire. Ilusage. ousre le:secre. Andresent, anderiora morce issole ofere.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, you know that it is not in its natural place anymore. Do this as long as it remains out of place; take one drop of black vinegar into a little cloth dampened with vinegar, and apply it carefully so that it does not touch any oil or other thing on the wound; then gently cover the wound again, covering all of it according to the size of the wound, and give good care that the wound is not stretched with a fracture; and many times have done this deeds the wise physician, and by doing so brought forth death or corrosion on the patient at any time; and should be more molten and softer than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that something unfortunate may happen to it, just like we said before, and relieve pain at the site, there should be no need to place anything on top of those; but encase entirely around them, in the damp cloths, heavy fabrics, and lint. And when after one or two years the wound is reopened by a blow to it, then you know that what you placed inside has been preserved, and apply healing ointment to the wound, similar to other poultices and remedies.
And it is required that you lay the limb down for two times a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes sound and healthy again.
And it is required that the limbs are discharged in such a manner as to allow the blood flow unobstructedly downward.
And if for many days it does not heal but breaks again, and the patient cannot mend it anymore because there are small fragments of bone; then you know that with this wound one must treat it carefully, and remove all these dislodged pieces that cause pain to come about.
And if an abscess appears on the surface or in any other form of corruption, it must be treated according to what is discussed in this chapter by the physician. And when the bone breaks and protrudes from the limb, like that of the shoulder blade or joint aid, and similar things with large limbs; do not treat it at all because many times the death has come about after waiting for two decades or more; perhaps you caught it after waiting for a couple of years or three hundred years, then cure the wound if you can; but if not, leave it.
and those who come with saltwater (i.e., infections caused by the presence of high amounts of salt).
We have come many times after the healing of the fracture, mainly when it is close to the joint, and it's quite unfortunate to see how the limb looks afterwards; and sometimes not even the limbs can perform their natural functions.
The '''Aragonaises ofs lez.
When the fracture of the bone is restored and returns afterwards in weak and delicate limbs, for many reasons: because it was too tightly bound, as if it did not fit at all; or because it had too many ligaments, so that it could not bear the load on its joints; or due to excessive arousal; or due to numerous dislocations; or due to large movements, which were not in their time; or because there was little flesh in the body, they are weak.
And the cure is that you feed the patient, and make their body limber, until it multiplies in them; and give them baths, and bring joy and pleasure to them; then apply pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, and often arises with running water, until the swelling returns to its natural state.
A twisted member after health.
When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bone breaks apart, and the shape of the twisted member is ugly, neither does this naturally belong to its work: no one should believe those fools who say you must break the joint all new; many people have done so in our land, and these methods are blamed for causing great harm, sometimes even death. However, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, then make a mollifying ointment, like diatomaceous earth well made; take musk of marsh pearlwort, confit it with lion's grease or linseed oil, and apply the ointment on top; or take figs that have fat, grind them with flour from colon seeds, and other medicines that soften the hardening.
And there is no bone with nodulation to rub continuously and for a long time on wet hands; rather, ease the movement of the limb every hour.
And if the twistedness is old and hardened, like stone, it needs to be burned with iron, so as to cover the bone, delicately at a fine incision; and apply salve and study in the treatment.
This begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocation comes from no joint of its place, so it cannot move at all; and the limb is misformed, and the patient suffers great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs for any reason, it must now be kept to regain tenderninas.
Because if it is delayed, the joint swells up, and sometimes put back to its place with pins in the bone; but it does not need to move at all where it has become inflamed: many times caused rashes and other pains.
However, when this happened, make the patient healthy again, then let it rest until the discomfort is relieved; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then massage lightly on each member as treatment comes to his point.
And I have ordered the treatises of the dislocations of the limbs' heads.
Of the mouths, et estuet quint deusie. Labeaux parole esparagus, laissades pour leescles en cesteins siens, que jectes apeirre chascune.
: ilfaire levet ous anda voi tupper, aids aforse:sangustromaine.
When the dislocation is small, it returns again by various arrangements.
And if it is complete and accomplished, it must be reset promptly, without complaint.
And in such a manner that the minister's finger turns the head of the patient with malady, and thrusts one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is .ij. parts; and commands the patient to soften his mandibles, and move them from all sides.
And the physician places equal weight upon it, until it returns to its original position.
And if the returning is stiffened, immediately bringing together the .ij parts of the mandibles, heating them with warm water and oil until they become loose again; without complaint for a return that has been stiff or slow, as we have said before.
And when they are returned correctly, and the mouth of the patient with malady closes well after being made soft by covering it with a cloth dampened in oil roses and wax, then apply moisture lightly to all the joints.
And the patient with malady lies on his back, and if his limbs are between .ij. spaces (possibly referring to specific measurement of space or distance), ensuring he does not move them either right or left, but merely eases light meat until the pains are gone and the mandibles have been anointed;
And then pour the patient, he must eat lightly and not work to open his mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well anointed and sound again.
And if the .ij mandibles cannot be restored to their former position within an hour, and are not converted back into their original locations, then fevers arise that are customary for such conditions, and possibly even a digestive solution or nausea with vomiting may occur;
And when you see this, then you know it is a loss; and many times those affected have died within seventy years.
and of forcefulness
The little piece cannot dislocate back and forth between the sides and shoulders, and is never displaced further, and it really feels that way to him.
And the restoration is that the severe pain goes away on his back, and he extends his arms; then presses the joint with your hand, and it returns; then places him on the elevator and supports the knee, and holds it.
and the limb that is towards his side cannot dislocate; if not, and when it displaces at all, then reposition him with his joint, as we have said; put him on the elevator and support the knee, hold it, and command the patient to rest until he is well.
And in this way we bring back the shoulder joints, when they are displaced from their position.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Knows that the shoulder is dislocated for only two reasons: firstly, it displaces its upper part towards the arm; and secondly, its lower part; and sometimes it displaces the top part above, which happens rarely.
And it is never dislocated behind the shoulder, and not within the nerves; and often displaces downwards towards the arm, especially for those who have little strength, because in this case she falls quickly; for those with enough strength, it jumps up and returns to its original position.
And sometimes by some impact or fracturing, the shoulder swells up sharply at an incision, and it is believed that she has been dislocated due to this.
It therefore must be that you examine it thoroughly, as long as you are certain about it; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that when the dislocation goes towards the arm, and distinguishes between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, you will find in their manifest differences. And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hole, and around its upper part there is also a hole, as if it were one bone; and it cannot make the severe pain return to its original position or any movement.
And also, if it is displaced upwards, it is not hidden, because you will see it clearly around the shoulder joint.
And this way of dislocation is not to be reduced when it is new or if the child's body is painful.
And the dislocation.
s: thefeucces:nacue ishacivekastre presse. tstarte (butt:secrebesculat itudeximente.
Then simply dislocate the severe pain on his back, and place a piece of even linen underneath it, not too moist nor too hard, then put the patient's heel on top of that, and carefully elevate the head of the misaligned shoulder, and remove the limb from the shoulder joint.
And other ministers may treat the head of the misaligned shoulder so that it does not move further; if the dislocated shoulder returns as before, and you see if repositioning according to this method works:
And make a larger body present than the misaligned one; and place it against the shoulder blade undernee the misaligned shoulder, elevate the shoulder blade, so that the misaligned shoulder hangs downwards. And other ministers may remove the limb from the misaligned shoulder towards the abdomen; and if the dislocation is too loose, do not put any weight on it, and the dislocation returns to its original position now.
And the repositioning can also be done in another way: and it is like fixing a long stick on the ground, which should have the same properties as an arrow, not too heavy nor too thin. Then place something soft under the misaligned shoulder, and if the dislocation is long-standing, extend the patient's hand away from the other side in a straight manner, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
And if it does not return through these methods that we have mentioned, perform this treatment: take a long stick of two arms in length, with the head shaped to enter underneath the shoulder blade. In the manner shown below: (image is supposed to depict the described shape)
Then place the stick under the long-standing part of the shoulder, which should not bruise the misaligned shoulder; and put it under the misaligned shoulder blade; extend your arm along the lengthy stick, and attach the sling there; hold the sling on one side of a wide strap, and extend your hand downwards, and let the patient' Written in this passage is an example of:
This passage describes the process of attaching an arm sling in various steps. To answer this question, we must identify which literary device is not used in these descriptions:
sour. Ipsum ajorne desu it's esle malice ofte ofrerexample. It’s oues devisiij. In theavior.
And if the dislocation is due to dampness and it has come about, or for another reason, then you must administer four pins, as they are set before the physician who specializes in pincers.
And if you do all this, and after two years it slips again, and the dislocation does not hold, and it cannot lift its arm upwards, then you know that the main nerve at the top of the shoulder is crushed or stretched or softened; and you know that the dislocation has never been fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the front or the chest, and involving the muscles or behind, if it is made by a blow or arm extension, and administer other treatments; and care for as long as he remains healthy.
And after the treatment comes greater pain in the limb and returns to slight movements, if it uses the malady's hot bath many times until that pain subsides, and returns to its first natural state.
of the dislocation cost
You know that the cost of the dislocation is reimbursed by pins and returns; and if it's dislodged from all parts, especially in front and behind, and you see and feel well; and refund according to each case. And when you join the dislocation cost with good health, you must see it openly. Because the dislocation is fixed, and it cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset him again so as to remove loose bones, because if one removes loose bones, then it would be troublesome to bring them back; and possibly they cannot be removed entirely in any case, especially when they are at the rear; for such dislocations cause greater pain than others, and often lead to death.
And the restoration, if you can bring his hand outstretched: and your handgive frome in it's root of the jointure of tway.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand back to its own hand, and with pain from the root of the palm that has been released.
And if he does not return to the normal position, apply strong extension; and when two ministers extend his arm, they stretch it back so that it does not move with extension; then turn the arm in each direction, then wrap a long and wide cloth around it.
And when the doctor touches the joint at his hand, he does not use any oil to soften the joint, then binds it tightly until it relaxes.
And when it is back in place, he places it on a dry board with pieces of iron undernee, strains it firmly, and holds the maladjusted arm at the elbow for several days, then releases it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, release it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, resume the board with the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is securely fastened; then release it.
And if he feels sore after the return of the joint, and it moves again, bathe and rub well, until it is soothed; or you place a warm wool milk on the joint for one day and one night, then let the doctor apply hot baths. And when he sweats, constantly rub the joint, then replace the warm wool milk, and then apply hot baths; and do this for one or two times until it is healed; and if you see, put on warm moist cloth with fat, and stretch it upwards; and if it returns to its original position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand, and when it returns it is light compared to other joints; thus you must bring it back quickly in my presence as soon as it has been dislocated, so that its limb becomes swollen or if it is located elsewhere with heat.
And the return is that you place the maladjusted hand on a table, extend the ministers' hands, and observe it evenly, so that he places his palm in front of the dislocation, and binds it tightly until it relaxes.
Generally speaking, you must see if he is well positioned; then place the maladjusted hand's back on a table with extension and return. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then place the maladjusted hand's back on a table and he observes his hand in front of the joint appearance; if it returns now, that's good.
If not, if the extension with mild board relaxes, then let it return in this way by repeating.
And if he cannot endure it, and you do not put the dislocation back in position after some days, then let the joint remain tight.
other thing;et s'il ne por ce qu’ il est enmurte la mains.
:er vout, thees iten le.mesure le. I'sies and in:eterng les iaustraistre. Anderior, le soull ofsusain:lorenture.  ires. Auble lorintres acept. Whatent.I :ger ione.
And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no crack, then the hot water treatment, and scraping until he becomes healthy again.
The dislocation of a finger joint.
They have never dislocated the joint of his hand to any part, not once on the back of the palm or the abdomen.
And it is the joint, and reset the dislocation into its pockets as long as he relaxes, then support the head of the dislocated joint, and move it towards the area where it has come undone.
And let him stay for two years, and then put him back in place; and nourish him as we have said, and make him stretch each day, and make him move again, and reconnect him, doing this often until he becomes slender.
And also do the same if it is dislocated in another area of the hand, doing so as you have done before until he becomes healthy again.
Double dislocation of the shoulder blade.
When either the shoulder blade or the neck is dislocated in more than one place, there is no remedy for it, because death comes to him quickly.
And the signs are that his movements are uncoordinated freely given, and he cannot hold them, and many times the limbs become weakened, or the fingers or elbows or legs.
And many times it moves in two parts; that which moves at the back is called "Gilbert's disease."
The treatment, in this case, is that Gilbert's disease came from childhood; if it had no cure or treatment at all.
And that which falls due to a fall or due to similar things, the old methods of treatments were told by great words, but there is no significant benefit in all this.
But I have acted according to my intention and formed different remedies.
I say that in Gilbert's disease which comes from the uterus, there is no treatment or healing.
And also that which comes directly to the side joints, and it cannot be healed except with remedies specifically for those coming from the backside, as I have said.
And it is that the painful area should be spread over one of its limbs equal to him, and have strain from above so that it does not break apart.
Then place a piece of firewood on the head in the ground forming it, and another one for the fingers, and tie together loose joints around the painful areas, and other ones for the hamstrings, thigh muscles, groins, and ankles.
And two people can see if the joints are connected, one to the head and the other for the fingers, among the various pieces of firewood.
And they should be firmly fastened as we have said, and the patient places his hands on the spine straighten until he relaxes. This passage likely pertains to a part of the treatment where patients are asked to lie on their back with their palms pressed against the spine in order for it to relax or straighten:
And if it does not return by this cure, take a yoke of two arms long, and pierce through it in the middle, and let the pain be on that side, and strike the head of the yoke into the spine; And put his pins on the other head of the yoke, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see him doing it with his hand turning.
And do you insert two pins into the pain of one arm, and place another two pins between each pin, with an inch or so space between them.
And in each pin there should be one hole, or the turning device moves over it, and firmly fix them in place so they do not move; and between each pair of pins there should be a small pin that turns, so that when those turn, the turning device can rotate.
And then tie the line that is among the scales to the turning device near the head of the yoke, and another line towards the pins at the other turning device, and each minister turns his turning device on all sides of the line as we have said.
And when it is like that, spread a drying agent abundantly with some wax, and then the sticks, and then the candle on a table of two feet long, which will clean the area of gilbert's fracture and the healthy part of the spine, and bind it with a line as we have said, and use the shoulder pain lightly so that it is healed.
And if nothing happens at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the candle we mentioned before; and sometimes I give a small piece of cloth.
And there is sometimes an appearance in the back spine of the upper vertebrae, and we must take care that it is dislocation; and because the bone comes out for this reason, one should not have any presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
Dislocations of the hernia.
We know that the dislocations of the hernia and those of the shoulder joints only come from dislocations alone; they do not occur like other joints; the joint of the hernia is divided into four parts: between them, before and behind; in this case it's more apart, but less forward and backward.
And the knowledge of its dislocation when joining the painful leg with the healthy one is that it becomes longer and the painful joints are wider than the healthy ones, and the patient cannot double his knee cap by heat. And it is the muscle that is in front of the hip joint because the kneecap comes out from there.
And the sign that he gets to backward, so it is contrary to those in front.
And the signs that occur in front, so it is: healing well; wholesometh they do not double the knee capillary, and if it be, and if ne'teles deffinant lains defforest leu enlengulieres desormenent malaidexemens deffice quittance a lauremest itaigne:
kewage, ilk acomprehair: the costume so:10xer:carlifles: anter ofxent (the litter.  ça. ous, siure:cause.tin.a.   :ce lictis.
The resetting of this kind of dislocation so that you respond to its presence, and it lasts according to its position, and there is no remedy; and it does not require any assumption.
And in the shoulder where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four types of dislocation, if you hasten to reset the joint, and place it back inside and downward, and move it towards right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it requires that you prepare one strong instrument, and apply the leg to two hands or to a ligature placed above the groin; And other ministers extend their hands above in a way that they push their hands down on the sill, then they bind it with another ligature under the thigh; and others have the head of the same ligature.
And they extend upwards and downwards both of them once, until the malady is lifted from the ground at least once, and then continue hanging there.
This manner of extension is common in these four types of dislocations, and if the dislocation has returned, just as we have said, it's well done.
If this is not the case, it requires a cure for its appearance. When the dislocation is close to being reset, it requires that you soothe the affected area on the side of the shin, then apply the ligature under the root of the knee, and around the hollow where the artery lies, then place the ligature high towards the angle, and toward the muscle.
Then another ministers spread their arms and hug the large vein of the injured shin, and extend it to its lower form: if it returns now to its joint; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot secure it in this manner that we have described, then it requires that you bind the two malaligned feet together with a strong ligature under each foot arch and at the heels, and extend the malaligned leg twice as much as the others;
And then be hang them from the head of a strong beam, and .iiij. etes de sourcilier d’un l’encoi.
:en leu'soule lore togeau ous :" (afeildesanlenture ofte soultient.age es:governement fromage. Itumorrect.journead. Itrag, etiquninage.  ́se: itent'soutre jurmente.
Then apply two sticks, one to the head and another to the shoulders, then insert a stick between the ribs into the patient's chest to restore its shape. and planted with wet linens around it so that the wound does not bleed, then stretch each limb towards him, and he sets the dislocation in place with his hand.
If it returns, that's good. But if not, place him on the ground and press as we have said in relation to swelling, and elevate his sore side with care for the patient's pain.
And when the dislocation is before, it must be quickly extend the affected leg, and according to what I have said; then place his hand where he feels pain from being in an angry position, press with the other hand, and pull the limb away towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is farther back, it does not need to extend the affected leg downward or lift him up from the ground, but he must be as we have said in the position of lying after being pulled out further back, like when we laid on the two hinges. and lean it upon his face, and he extends it as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table.
and when the patient extends his legs, they will be equal; but adjust the ribs, and put the support, and bind a band around it so that he does not move.
and if he rests for two or three years or more, then put the support again, and if they are equal, straighten as before, and let him go, for three years; then release him to walk well until his limbs are strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee joint
The legs are dislocated according to three methods: that is, between and behind, and backward; and do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if it does not touch his hip, then you know he is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit up right, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and place him on his feet.
then take his knee in your hands, and bring it between your legs, then bend the two sides of the knee joint formed; and another assistant extends his limb so that the legs return to their normal position, and you know he walks well with his leg bent at the hip.
and put the poultice on it, and draw the leg to the hip, and tie them together strongly for two or three years or more, then release him; and do not force the patient to walk until his limbs are strengthened.
And if the members are not present, then give it a strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip joint, so that he is healthy again.
about the dislocation of the ankle joint.
The toes are sometimes united, and sometimes fully dislocated, between and backward.
And the signs that heel isle de la hainche:il demeure duce:
levesures. Legi- n'sousre voudur,lais. Theesure from theur: entirelegrau deafarent, thewomane.  ige of itilight.
And when it is dislocated from the top, it must be set right, and you hold him with one ministration above the ankle on the leg.
Then grasp the patient with your right hand, and then repeat the same with the left hand two times, then raise him up, and let the patient down gently from above.
And do this two times as we have said, lifting and lowering the patient; if it returns, that is good; but if not, then the procedure must be repeated because it returns.
And if it cannot return like this, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and firmly place a stretcher under his hips between his knees, and wrap him with cloths so that he does not hurt himself.
Then you should tie the other hand and have other ministers stretch out the patient's arms or along his neck where it lies on top of him. Then each minister should stretch equally, and the stretran should be placed again between the hips of the patient to hold him while you lift.
Then place the dislocation equally at his hands, and other ministers tie the healthy leg above the knee, and the dislocation will return promptly.
And when it is at the right point, then you apply the plaster and fasten it above the leg, form the straitening, and hold the patient's leg, warning those behind the ankle not to pull too tightly.
Then leave it for two or three years if the straitening is not loosening, and then remove it after one year or quarter, and send the patient to walk around in four years. And if he moves before this term, it is not certain that he will no longer dislocate.
And if a blow strikes and the patient comes, you must calm him down as we have said elsewhere, until he is well again.
This last line appears to be out of context, but it could potentially mean "from both sides," referring perhaps to addressing concerns from both medical practitioners or patients about a particular treatment method. Without further text for reference, however, this interpretation remains speculative. The rest of the translation remains as provided above.
When these two dislocations are repositioned, they should be gently extended in work and it's a light thing. This sentence seems to follow the medical context of discussing the process for treating certain types of joint or musculoskeletal injuries involving repeated relocation (re-dislocation) rather than two dislocations as described earlier.
And if these dislocations are in no other part of the back of the patient, you must set him up on one or two straight boards or completely upright table, and put your patient so that it exposes those joints, then press firmly until he returns. This sentence likely refers to a method for correcting dislocations where the common location is not in the back of the body, possibly addressing cervical (neck) dislocation scenarios within historical medical practices.
And when it is equalized, and nothing opens up in the foot of the patient, then place a table underneath with two supports, straiten him firmly, and let him stay for two years, then remove him; and make him rest until he's well again. This sentence seems to describe part of the after-care treatment where repositioning has been accomplished and measures are taken to ensure proper healing over a period of time with gradual reintroduction to activity.
of wounds and of dislocations in combination
Ander les maundes a ce encele dislocation
:etude.tard, aragon. In theapre. The English translation.
And use at the beginning of soothing treatments, and let the patient hold God in their hand, if there is no hope for healing. And when you see hope, now straighten the limb back to its original position, so that the incision swells again.
And when the limb is out of place, now apply soothing treatments and care for the wound, as it requires dry ointments.
And if with dislocation there is also a fracture and small bones displaced, and the bone fragments, do what we have said in simple diseases.
And do not enter the path of fear, as I have said, because it is in accordance with your Creator's will, and for His knowledge of your weapon and body (the Church). Amen.
