O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O ye, most precious sons, I have completed this book which is the following of the science of medicine, assembled and fulfilled by its completion, and made the end according to its explanations and by its declaration.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in vision that I will complete this with your help, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forced in our region and strange everywhere, so has been lost the science and forgotten, and there remains only from it that the small descriptions in books of the ancients which have been moved by hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the folly, and are closed the intentions, and are far away the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will live and bring back to life the ordering of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I came together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and with other tools of the work in conjunction with the joining of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there is no good master of hands to be found in our times, the art of medicine has been stretched.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary that he who enters into this practice should understand the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows how to measure the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and joints and the number of these parts, and the movement and the stillness, and from them their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because he says that the nose is very much with the skin, and the flesh is little; and it is the same in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	So we say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not familiar with the things said, will guard himself so as not to make a mistake and will avoid those men; just as I have wanted many times more from those who interrupt this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut open her arteries on the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone from the bladder of an old man, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and died three days later in his own home.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had heard that they call it the treatment, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the wound, and I knew whether the patient would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another man who was treated for his wound by the Duke of our land, who had broken his leg and with the break got an infection; and the doctors, blinded by ignorance, bound the break on the wound with strong leather, and did not leave it alone to heal, and in that way I finished it, and he commanded him not to untie it; and he remained like that until the leg was completely swollen and the feet and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie his leg; and when I saw it was dislocated, he was in peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread by the limb until the limb had lost all its vitality.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is another method which destroys the pus and charms it, and then inflames with the evil of its power.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a cancer when it is purified with melancholic humors does not require that it be touched with iron unless there is no chance to remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And dear son, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: it means to see if there is danger in more than one disposition; and I will show you in each book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you take care of yourselves, so that the physicians may not speak ill of you. If you take your arms in your bed, and take your sick ones lightly and firmly, and use the best way, so by the grace of God you will come to health and be praised; and let fear of the dreadful diseases of illness depart from you, and put your armor away that makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	The Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take medicine for bad illness, lest you be called a fool doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about cauterization of fire and cauterization with medicine, and the chapters are arranged from head to feet; and forms of dressings, and instruments of cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are arranged in order and the forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting, and similar things; and it is ordered as follows: the head of each piece, just as a joint, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remember the work, it is fitting to say what the quality of aid and the danger of each condition are.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and danger are the longest words and subtle knowledge and the secret responses; and those who are wise among the learned speak about these things and agree on them; and they are unwilling to hear my long words because I am too tedious.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery is universally helpful to all kinds of matter, regardless of whether it is cold or hot.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In cold and dry matter together, some have discussed and said that fire cautery is great help; and the others said the opposite: that fire cautery does not do anything to illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated for hot illnesses with heat or dryness, but rather those who say the opposite claim that fire cautery does great help to hot and dry illnesses that come into the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you buy the body of man and its moisture is in accordance with the nature of fire, you find that the body freezes.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all the paths do not take fire unless one who has tried it knows how to apply the cautery, and is familiar with long usage of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and remedies and space in time; for other complexions we have no fear, themselves also in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and concurred on using cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, sons, that cautery combines fire with the secrets of cures, and greater good than applying hot medication.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come from fire except to a limb that is burned, and it does not affect any other limb if it is not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Medicines carried from one member to another by moving, make the afflicted member sick with disease and pain; and by chance, the fire does not harm the patient because of its height and due to the goodness of its substance, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And what I have found through experience and the long service and study that I have put into this art, is on display in nature; and therefore I excuse myself from being lengthy in speech, because it does not please me to reveal to you the secret of fire, and the quality of its work, by which it cures diseases of the body, as the philosophers said, demonstrating it.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when they will agree on what time the cauterizations must be done, and they set up prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is beneficial in all times, because the harmful consequences are removed by the aid of cauterization; and oneself is cured from painful necessities beyond and hard to bear which cannot wait until greater harm befalls the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, dear son, as to how the foolish ones behave; because the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say so thus; but it's not like what they think, for cauterization is not just a medicine that moves the complexion, dries out the humors which are the cause of pain, and brings about swift results as a medicine, because of its speed and virtue, and the value of its work and power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	In order to treat the disease once and for all according to the patient's complexion and the nature of the disease and its virtue; and since these superfluities are gathered in him from the acquisition of food and similar things, if you do not administer cauteries to him when he has little superfluity and moisture, as is done with cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, this pain does not return; but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the behind of medicine, and this is seeing; but they do not believe that cautery has any value after medicine, their opinions are false, and cautery is considered the back of medicine because when we administer various types of cures for no illness at all, they do not work, so we give them cautery, and it is valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And then open, for cutting with fire is the medicine of the rear parts, not according to the foolish opinions.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cutting with gold instruments is more potent than with iron, and they say that fire is used only because of the quality of the gold and its substance; and they say that the lead of a cautery does not cause putrefaction, but it is not seen because I have proven it, and I have found that it is so in some men; and cutting with gold is more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And you should not know when you heat an instrument of gold, that it is cooled down by the color of the gold, and immediately cools; and if it is heated too much, then they put it in the fire; and so there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery so that what has been moved may be fixed at our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter on the treatment of the upper joints just as if they were at the foot.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moist and cold on the head, because one does it for the cause of a disease called "soda", and also for many humors that come out of the head to the eyes, ears, and because of numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and themselves for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged with medicinal solution, cleansing the head and removing the third or fourth foulness, according to what the virtues, age, and habit of the patient can bear; and then clean the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on some cloth; after placing the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and when you come to his two middle fingers, if they bleed from the incision, then take up the cautery called "olivare", because this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the knife on the patient's skin, and make a small incision with your hand a little at a time, turning it around; then lift your hand immediately, and reset the wound if you see a small bone exposed; and if you don't see an exposed bone, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I told you before; after take some silk, put on gauze and soft cotton inside, and place on the skin, and let it stay for three days; then cover with a moile cloth in fat; and leave on top until the incision is closed; afterwards cure the wound of the torn flesh which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if the old ones said, when it stays on the wound longer, it gets worse; and for this reason you should apply ointment.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that you must so cauterize the wound that part of the bone is burned, and then replace what has been burned with bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they also said that you must cauterize it so severely above, and push it so hard when it is lowered as far as the bone is just as wide as a thorn that women sew into their girdles; for this reason the humors will come out fresh from outside; after that, one must cure and soak.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be entirely good in all things; fires that bring relief to some men when they have no choice but to fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the joints are weakened by continuous solutions from nature, just as we testify in other members; and also, when it comes to the joint of the sick person, it is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salutary and healing for me, and therefore I use this remedy.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When all the head comes with chronic pain that lasts for a long time, and he must use the patient's herbs and pills called "cochie", and expectant of purging of head and oil and emplaster; and if they make him cautery as we have said before, and it does not bring relief.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Beware so that the patient's joints are of strong nature and not too frozen; then make the cauterization under that cautery as we have said before.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making cauterization on each horn of the head until the bone, just as we have said, and make another cautery on the one that is called "vasselz"; and it is this one where you put ventouses; and tie your hand so that you do not see through to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations on the horns be more subtle than those which are made for the mortality of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When pain suddenly occurs in one part of the head, and the disease is spread to the scalp, and the hairs are pulled out by medicinal means, and other treatments have been done as I mentioned earlier, but none of them help: then you must perform cautery according to two ways, namely hot medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of hot medicine is that you take an ounce of aloes, remove the scab and reapply it over the two hairs, and then perform a cauterization at the temple in such a way that you can replace the ounce of aloes under the skin; when it is replaced, so that the lie is tied and restrained well and left for 12 hours; then unbind and treat with hot fire the ounce of oil, and leave the wound for 2 days or 3 days; then put on a cotton plug soaked in butter until the injury heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of wounds until it is healthy; and if you see if do what I have written about burning medicines, which I have prescribed or ordered to treat burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of what is this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clover or has little wormwood, and at its center a small appearance; and places it on the painful place, holds your hand, and twists the iron lightly until the middle part of the spice that burns is burned; and lifts your hand that the artery does not burn, which is before, and drains abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After metting cotton in awe of the vein and putting sor on the leaf for three days; then put cotton moist with butter, and cure the leaf with ointment until it is sanez; and if you want to cauterize this emigraine with cautery called "cultellare" at its full point, and keep from covering the artery in this emigraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migraine.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	As you cure the migraine as we have said in divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauterys before mentioned by medicine and iron do not help at all, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and so put a line of two halves of oil on the leaf, and hold your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that it does not come near the bone; and be careful of the mandible that mutes when we eat, and let the nerves have no regard except for the mute and spasms do not appear to the patient, and be careful of the decrement of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and myself also for he who does not know how to do it, and who is not studied; and leave the operation in my way; but I will tell you how one can sustain life when the artery is cut, and I will show you to him at what place it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If the fire cautery does not relieve the illness, and the patient suffers, cauterize the wound in the same way as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said on the chapter of artery extraction, with the cauterization having two handles; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of pain from the ears due to frostbite.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from the ear due to frost, and you have tried solutive medicines and other cures that we have said on division, and the pains do not cease, then apply this cauterization which is called "pins", because it has this form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After piercing all around the diseased ear, or between the two ears if it causes pain in both, and then pushing a little towards the root of the ear after staining the area with the cautery, wait for X points around each ear; after the treatment let them be so that they are sane.
de la torture de la bouche	From the torture of the mouth.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be cured by cauterization only of those that move from a swollen tongue, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make cauterization on the appearances that come from dryness and pus.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this appearance of torture that is muffled by a swollen tongue, dryness, and purging of the head and gargareism, and since it's true, then you must cauterize the patient with III cauters: one in the root of the ear, and another slightly behind the temple, and the third near the joining of the two lips; put the cautery on the part that is open and healthy, and cauterize directly the head of the ear above a little below the corn of the head, and another in the temple as long as an inch; and let the cautery stay there until the moisture of the cure is dried.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is like the shape of a scimitar which we have shown before, but it is a bit more subtle and it should be that the cutting instrument is a bit larger; after treatment let him recover as I said, until he is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is an old disease and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the sick person does not have fever, then do four cauteries: two on each of the two horns of the head, one at the forehead, and one in the place called "vessel" which we have mentioned before, and a cautery on the lower part of the stomach near the mouth; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	of lachrymation (lacrimation).
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease it is fitting to give the patient great and large pills, as well as a powder of mind-altering ingredients. After that, take the head of the sick person, and place the emplastre of sinapis on the occipital bone, which is written in treating emplastres; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy in this way, it is good; and if not, do III cauteres on the gums of the head when going down to the neck, and have space between each cautery I duo of large ones; and treat him as others, and if you see a joint sticking out, and the patient suffers, do I cauteries in the middle; and if he is strong, II cauteries above the two horns, and the cure until he is healthy; and let be the cauteries which are called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified with years and what we have said before; after taking the head of the patient, then do cauteries on the gums of the head and above each horn, and I at the back and III above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is severe, then do IIII cauteries above the spine of the back; and let it stay until the fever subsides, and lift your hand; after that, treat him as long as he is healthy, and let be the cauteries which are called "olivare" what we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should use fire cautery only on those who are flaky, and it is best to first cleanse the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and suffers from many pain medicines.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, he will make gargling and mastication cleanse the brain often with bones meat; after he makes the head rich in milk, and then he does fire cautery according to what we have said before, and on the shoulder, and on each horn; and if the patient suffers greatly, he should do fire cautery as I told to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine at the back and neck, and so he should do fire cautery with olive oil according to the way I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, then if they make the fire cautery subtle according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy there are superfluities or moist ones corrupted and swollen greatly, then the cautery for cuttings as we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then the doctor should give him something for which the intellects must be purified, according to what it is in front in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the head of the sick person; after making the linen bandage well-made, like a circle, if you tie it on the head; and the patient must cross his fingers, and they should be held in all parts; after presenting the linen, and applying ointments of pure goat's fat ancient; and the heat is tempered so that the doctor can pour it into him when he can suffer it; after emptying the circle by tying it inside the head, and letting it cool down; and doing this to each patient once a week with another good governance, until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see cautery being done while making multiple pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery is most beneficial for the brain, and then cover it with moist cotton in butter and linen grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye pain comes first from the signs that I said in the division, then begin and do thus: give to the patient a purifying drink of wine, and clean off all moisture from the head, and make him sweat or take a bath several times at dawn.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instructing him to look at his head, and making cauterization on the swollen part of the head, and making two more cauterizations on the temples if there are symptoms in both eyes together, or one if there is a symptom in one; cut all over the cautery the veins and arteries that are under the wound, and make them cauterize long according to the length of the temple; and watch for concussion of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, stain him with as little force as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and by incision how to do it carefully; and never make a cautery or a hatereil behind the two bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the eyes' blood
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	How the blood of the eyes is old and accustomed when it lies on the veins, or where there are arteries that appear to be outside the head; and one sees that it's a surplus of cold, flaccid humors, therefore do as I said in the beginning when I was saying let the cautery descend downwards to the eyes: cut off the eyebrows, and two cauteries on each temple, and two cauteries behind the two bones; and if there is need more, cauterize with a fine needle above the eyebrow.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A man's body in sorrow through within his eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in division, and he does not benefit from it, then give him three bitter medicines; after his head, and cut fire or on a mile of olive oil cautery; and do two cauteries of cautery called "clavilis" above the two sores, one below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you will cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see it, do the cautery on the two sores as well, just as long as the sores are; and do not leave your hand alone except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	One hair that sticks out when it's wet.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is never any occasion that the hairs of the sores are converted to scar tissue, and they prick at it, and then you do cautery according to two manners: that is to say, by fire or with hot medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in your own room; after so he should write on a piece of paper how it was like as the wick of myrrh, and how it began from the sign of the hairs; then put cotton soaked in oil of beeswax and musk on the wound.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked little by little several times, until the wounds are closed to the point; and the signs of health of the work is that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs lifted towards the point of the oil; then let your hand go, and leave thus for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the scabbing is removed; after the treatment of ointment until he is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow after this, and the paper becomes soft again, then resume cautery on the same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are fallen, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural position, even and not pulling on the hair with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of the medicine that burns is to instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long as they are great and even; then make a parchment the shape of mint leaf; take French soap and live charcoal each one .2, and crush them together well; and do it hastily, if it does not cool down, then place on the form that you have made like the leaf of mint, and put on the paper of the eyes; and if the patient holds in oil alone, then you must also do it twice; and put cotton wool soaked in oil under it. And apply the head of the patient to your healthy side and show off the medicine, and press .2 pouders (powders) every time the patient feels pain from the medicine, because he feels pain as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the swelling has passed, then lift the limb high, and reward yourself if you see that it is lifted just as it was lifted by heat or incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not so, then put the medicine back on the limb or let the medicine cease working until your wounds are even and your eyes be fixed; then put soft cloth in butter on it until the wounds are closed, after applying ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must guard yourself well at your wound with great care so that it does not touch the medicine,
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes dry after, and the hair pricks in the oil, so resume the medicine on that one who has become moist with his own natural paper, just as you have done before; until the cure is healed. And this is the form of a fire cauterization made by myrrh.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	Know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to this so be your exertions; and do not reply to the straight way for one who has the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistula by fire cauterization.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures are not profitable, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in a clean place; and take the bandages on his head and tie them between your hands in that manner that he does not move or lose his head; after put wet cotton in a vessel of oil or juice of persillion on it; after heat the cautery which is in that shape as it resembles a quill of vulture, so they are set together; if you see, it will be marked from one end of the head to the other, and if you see, it will be like an awning; but whatever, this one value for your benefit.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the abscess it bursts open and takes out the pus and dries it; and if it is closed, then apply, and take fire to the bowels; after put the hot cautery in the shape of which, and keep your hand on the cautery near the painful part towards the oil, so that your hands do not go mad; and put the cautery into the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you are coming to the beginning of the cautery just at the bone, then it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If that does not work, then restart the cautery again once and if needed, repeat it another time. Then put on a cotton cloth soaked in fat for 3 days; then apply the ointment desiccating until it is safe to heal, and after 40 days pass if it is still not healed, then put on medicine that causes the acid to eat through the bone so that the bone is exposed; and follow what he comes to in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is also a method of cautery for a fistula that none of the ancient ones said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Let it heal first and then make the incision; after putting in the incision, put in there finely camphor so that this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make it to the quantity of one .3 [of blood], and hold your hand over the wound firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, until the poultice is dissolved and runs down its oil; and it is necessary to put on the patient a moist cloth in wool or in vinegar: the poultice art used by the physician of fistula, and it heals for marvelous cleanliness.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	But if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If it is not so, then if necessary administer poultices on the wound, and bring the fistula back to the body according to what seems good in his own proper care.
des crevaices en levres	of fissures in the lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are fissures in the lips called "poil", and similarly in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fissures according to what we have said in our divisions, and the treatment does not help, then take a small cauterization with a culinary knife in that shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it immediately in those fissures until blood comes forth; after treatment, let the wound be treated with clay so that it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after it is infected and putrid and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in our divisions, but it does not help: therefore, it seems that you should apply cauterization according to the size of the fistula; after cutting and dressing the fistula, keep your hand until the iron comes out from under it, and at the root of it; and do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in our treatments, so long as it heals; and if it is healed thus, that is good; but if not, then it seems to need to discover the bone and remove the corrupted one, according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	Double movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat with medicines, and that does not work, then put the head of the patient on a clean cloth; after apply the cautery in such a way that you place a chain around the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot metal sharply, and hold your hand so the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with vinegar and let it stay for an hour and rich fire.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a way the teeth which were moving are fixed, and the gums softened restrained, and the moistures corrupted dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of the teeth comes from coldness, or there is coldness in the ear, and medicines do not help, then it is necessary to cut according to two methods: fire cautery and butter cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is done thus: you take butter from a healthy person and apply it to the point with a spoon of iron or flint; after taking cotton and wrapping around the tip of a tent, put melted butter on the aching tooth immediately and hold until it cools down; and do so repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see milk-like substance and cotton and butter melt, apply it to the aching tooth, and put iron hot so that the fire reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cautery is assembled like this: so that you tie a chain of iron or rope around it and make it thick enough so the heat does not come to the patient's mouth. After heating the cautery, for sure the form will come out after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will be stopped that very day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is fitting that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of applying this cautery, and then rushes to pull it out; and this is what the form of the cautery looks like:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make fire cautery where you wish, and according to what power you have; and this is the form of the chain:
des scrophules	de scrofulae  (the scrofula disease)
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of a runny and moist nature, and will not yield to digestion by medicines, then apply the cautery to the hair so that this follows afterwards. And give it two openings for the discharge to issue from the cautery on the other side; and place the cautery hot above the abscess once, or when it is suited, until it comes to a head of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply cautery accordingly to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on moist cotton wool in butter until the swelling is resolved; after treatment, set the limb straight again with ointments and poultices until he is cured.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the snake.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistors conquer on the channels of the body, and itself when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by medicines soluble; after applying cautery to the root of the throat, and you must not come more to the throat, but burn with one stroke only.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the second cautery is applied to the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and apply cautery to the "clavicle", because we have the shape before; treat the patient as we have previously said until he is healthy.
de la toust	of the tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the body are caused by cold moistors, and the patient does not have fever nor is dry, and the disease is old, apply two cauteries to the groin in each view; and a second cautery on the space between the two nipples; and apply cautery to the "clavicle" as previously said according to the shape mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	If you see them, perform fire cautery by pricking at the entire area called "points" because of which the form is present in ear disease; and let the points be 30, or more if they enter.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment according to what is said before, and let there be three pricks according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because it is easier to do so, because you make three cuts at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient is laid on his back and on his chest; after lift the wound that is inside the swelling with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within it, so heat the cautery which has two nails in its shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound so that it perforates just like on the costal side, and the figure of the cautery comes with four cauteries; and for this, the cautery is made with the one having three nails, because these are the forms of cautery; and they come in accordance with the subtlety of a net and this is the shape of the cautery which has three nails:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And at times it is pressed against this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying heat with a cauterizing tool, put the cautery on the broken bone with thread; then make the patient rest and do not keep the limbs still for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if the head of the shoulder is dislocated, since this happens little often, then apply cauterizing on thick bone or many cauterizing points.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is covered with moisture and it heals the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When frost is in the stomach and much moisture remains, then it must be extracted to its condition, and many purges occur to it, and the usual remedies do not benefit it, therefore it is necessary that the patient lies on his back, and extends his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	In the end after the third fire cautery I do one cautery under the nail of the finger by the amount of two, all over the cautery nail, and two cauteries in front of the two bones so that the figure of the cautery is at three angles, and has an equal space between each one so they are not assembled together when they get infected; and let the cautery be such that it pricks both parts of the heart, and the figure of the cautery should be like this near to the joint:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that one cautery is cut with a great cautery in the stomach according to this shape; and if anyone fears this cautery, then cut it pointwise and sign above the stomach at one spot according to the size which you see of 'enche'; then cut all the cautery which is called 'poins'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the treatment we had before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, pain from churning and moisture and great swelling arises, so that it is forced out of its natural condition due to superfluous things. The sick are cured with what we have said in divisions, and they do not benefit, unless the patient lies on his stomach; and this is a sign that three cauteries should be performed according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, excluding the hypochondriacs, to the left or right of the spleen, when there comes space between each cautery; and it should be done with long cauteries of the body, and not press hard at all; and only burn the middle part of the liver, and the patient lies directly on his feet; if he cannot, then is seated, and extends his legs, and lifts his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If your will is, then cauterize these cauteries of the cutlery, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and take care not to burn all your blood, for you would be drying out all the body; and lest it come to boiling, for the blood is very subtle at that point, and knowledge to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When an abscess forms in the liver, and you see whether it is within the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not very strongly; if it is in the membrane, he feels severe and unbearable pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure needs to drain the abscesses, it is fitting that the patient be placed under his head; and then they sign him onto where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to the razor, because of its shape.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Instruct the cautery to cauterize so that the wounds are burned, and it comes into contact with pus, until the wound is completely healed; after treatment according to the nature of the disease so that the patient is healed; and it should not be used from this cautery any fire other than by one who has studied long in the art of medicine, and whose hands have cured these diseases at some time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And so one can boldly perform it, and often I think that wounds should be left alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of cauterizing the pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said to cauterize pleurisy with the roots of aristoge, and in this way: take a long root of aristoge, as big as you can find, dry it, and make it just as big and just as long as your thumb; and cover it with oil, and press it onto the fire, and cauterize with cautery between the lung and the neck, and five small cauteries near the chin; and one cauterization below the fifth cost; and another above the stomach; and two between the shoulders, and two on either side of the cauterization between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but rather make it so as in aromatics.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said that an ancient man used cautery of fire similar to the razor, and heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it comes to the point where it is incised; and he sears the pain, as we have said in the apostle of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is great fear for the sick, or they are dead now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of mice.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the mouse disease, of which we have said in the divisions of the treatments, and it does not benefit, then they assert that there are three ways of cautery that all are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one way is that you make three or four cauterizations, linking them according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery on the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand too hard at all the cautery, so that the sick person lies on his back; and another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery that has two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the wound where the mouse is located, or when the cost comes from the left side, and lift the wound according to the size of the body, according to the length of the flesh, and the cauteries are according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After the fire cautery, instruct the patient to pour two fingers of wine into the wound so that they can be felt on the other side, and then apply heat to the cautery, and so four times. And if you see that there is only three left, cauterize all the cautery to three fingers.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has been soiled with rot for a long time, and this is what we said before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Fire is not good for dropsy, except when applied to the way called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations inside the wound, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the navel, and two behind, on the spine, and one in the back.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the cautery burn for a long time, open it by cutting out the putrid flesh; and do not leave the cure of the patient after the cautery; lest the healing be hastened, and both wounds will be worse together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the same as that which we have shown before; and it is olive oil for the back, according to what has been placed here.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical and full of bile citron, it is necessary to cautery on the back of the foot between the auricle and the little toe; and lift your hand with the cautery so that you turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, otherwise it will melt like fire, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing the two legs again, do each leg with two cauteries at the point of the cutlery; and let one cautery be longer from the knee before and another after it in the leg; and let the cauteries remain long enough to cure what's in them; after curing the other treatments that we have said.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When there is a solution of the belly coming from cold and moisture, to the point where the virtues that are retained and digestive which is in the stomach and intestine are effloresced and cannot be cured by any other means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with a very violent vertigo, do I grant cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken of before or the stomach cautery, in a circular movement; and four cauteries inside the belly subtle ones around all the cautery with sharp blades subtle, and two cauteries above the hanches.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, perform fire cautery on the fingernail, and fire cautery on each joint, and two times fire cautery on the stomach beneath the great one, because the cure is beneficial when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at their base, or one or more of them, and are old and large with cold and moist humors corrupted, treat as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit if you do cauteries: three times on the spine behind the back, the one that is entirely in front of the almeçade, little by little in triangular fashion, and one cautery below; and if you think the stomach is cold and the meat does not roast, and the face swells up, then put a grant cautery on the stomach, as has been said before, and another above the liver, and another above the muscles with all cauteries; and let the cautery stay for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment let the limb be healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "theelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the flesh, if it is inflamed as if by a razor, and then burns it completely on the flesh cut off; and let go of your hand so that the cautery comes to the surface of the vein, because it will not penetrate; do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh to be cut, cauterize each part as we have said; after the treatment of ointments, let them heal until they are sane; and if you cauterize a great cautery on a swollen spot, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of badly treated wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patients cannot endure a lance or an opening, what we will tell him in his own tongue, if it comes to this illness that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula and it has become inflamed, decayed, and putrid due to moisture and corruption, if you examine it thoroughly, and notice how deep it goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After applying the cautery that seems like a razor, and pouring it into the fistula according to how much the wound is open, repeatedly applying the cautery until the infected and corrupted flesh are burned away, one or two times, depending on how deeply the infection has set in; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and watch for great pains.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	Inflamed fistulas in the body of the testicle and intestine, if you warn yourself about these signs, do not apply fire to the groin only when it is cold, and think that they are not personal; after a cure, keep him so long as he becomes sane, and if the signs of infection appear and the materials are ossified long time, then know that he has become completely sane; and if the materials are not ossified, know that he has died, and corrupted the bones to the bone; and thus, like one of those we will speak in his place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from the fruit comes to the kidneys, and great swelling, and cannot urinate as much as usual, then it is convenient that you make a cautery on the kidneys of one part and another, using the cautery claw like we have previously mentioned; and if the cautery wounds are in the middle, three cauterizations in line will be needed, and more aid will result.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and swollen from heat and moisture, if it retains urine, then do fire cautery in the part facing upwards over the bladder, where the hairs of the nose begin, both to the right and left, and cut each one as long as you can with a finger; and hold the cauterization on the back where you have need; and cut them according to the form that has been said before.
de la marris	of the gallbladder
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the gallbladder is cold and moist, and it doesn't let itself be felt because it's swollen, and its flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, if it causes great pain: then it is fitting that you do III cauterizations inside the belly, as we have said for cautery of the bladder, and II cauterizations behind the back; and cut them according to what we have said.
de la hainche	From the hunch
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the moist viscous fluids descend to the joint of the hunch, and because of this they move out of their place, and the signs are that the knee is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the joints are swollen in some departures, so it is advisable to cauterize the patient on the joint of the hunch with a fire cautery similar to a circle, and sign before the joint as the joint turns, so that the joint is within the circle; and if it is cauterized like those who have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make three cauteries of the large olive oil, and do them as far in as all the joints. Let the cure until he becomes healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin, and it is of cold and moisture, and patients are treated with what we have said in division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: therefore it is fitting that you purge the patient of gross humors, or fetid pills, or other hard-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After purging him with fire; and the manner of the fire cautery is two in number: namely, assembling hot medicines, and cautery of fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is also many in number: among which one is that you cauterize on the groin area; three fire cauteries are done according to this shape, and make great depth and size, and space between each cautery the thickness of two does, and use olive oil cauteries; sometimes it is done at the midpoint on the chief of the groin, because there are four in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, so the cauterization on the cautery of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the haunch; but do it in such a manner that the circles contain all the haunch, and all the small points burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way to do it in sciatik, when the pain stays in the haunch and does not reach as far as the thigh or as far as the knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the thigh and the knee, then for every pain that the patient says he feels, two cauteries are made on the outside of the ankle; one on the left side a little, whatever the cut may be: either the cutlery cautery or burning the thick skin. And if the patient feels the pain extending as far as two feet or almost to the knee, then make cauteries where he feels the pain three points or four at the cautery called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	Instruct the patient if necessary, to do it more; and if he sees that the pain is below the kneecap towards the thigh, perform fire cautery with a cauterizing cutellaire or circular knife, and take good care in all your cauteries so that you do not let the cautery burn the nerves and great arteries, and do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen others who had fire applied to the ankle on the foot, and they let it burn so that the leg was entirely bare, and also the foot, and it became perceived and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a treatment of the abdomen that led to death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	If the pains are in both upper and lower parts together, do fire cauterization in one and the other.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	Instruct the wise men to make in cautery of the hainche (which means 'hen') thus is the manner: make such a hammer as this [points to an imaginary hammer] and let it be of the head as big as ours, or one less, and let it pass through each other in alternates so that there is space between them like the width of an ear of corn; and let the spaces be two-thirds, and also be like our teeth; and have a well-made iron handle; and this is their form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated so that it is red and smoldering, and then put it on top of the diseased hen, and turn it over to its healthy side; and once it has cauterized with one cautery, let it stay for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and let the wound open for a long time; after that, administer treatment as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its effect, and if you see few who use it; and since it seems to be one of the good cauteries, which can endure, and at which place where it occurs.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine burns if you make an instrument between two bars, in which it follows the edge of a door, and is made of iron or linen to a length visible, and has II [two] us, and has between each one the quantity of the thickness of a doves [dove's] neck; and over and under, and join together as this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the flax of the hawthorn on the patient lying on his cost side, and press your hand very much on the flax of the hawthorn; after pour some hot water between the two circles of the awl that have been heated a little by the fire, and let it remain for one hour, and suffer the patient the heat and the burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It finds mordication in the same way as fire; and when the mordications pass, lift your hand with the instrument and move the hump of the jaw downwards sweetly, and leave for three days, and put on butter so that what is black from the splintering becomes absorbed; and let it stay three more days until it rots in the wound; and this would be the rear aid after the treatment of limbs till it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to just up to the thigh or just down to the leg, then use that instrument which you heat according to what you have done with the jaw before; and this is the way of the hot sweat, and I have written it in the treatment of medicine for rectification.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take calomel and quicksilver, equal amounts of both, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	In case of small defects that cannot be seen except for the point of a splinter entering; and put over that hole another pot with better weight, and put above it alkaline and chalk and apply sweet on top, until there are two more puffs of powder to grasp in your hand; and leave it thus until they come out wet and sticky like wax or pot plaster, then take all that away, and place upon chalk and upon alkaline so as it was before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if it becomes very wet and is administered in the movement of overworked medicine and cautery of other members; because all these works are like fire, and there are other medicines that must be cauterized well like this, with vinegar and honey acacia and chalk with soap, all these things melted together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a cure from which one man was cured of the pain in his groin and sciatic nerve, and great praise, and says that no other cure is needed, and he became well only once when this cure was performed, and he would bathe as he instructs here afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner that you take a green and fresh vertigris, and crush it much with a little bit of fat, and apply it to the groin and the thigh where the pain is located, and bind it; and let it be for three hours, and as much as the patient feels the pain, will cease.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then put it in a bath so that the body becomes a little red, and put him in the litter, and the pain will depart all and he will be well.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And instructs that no one should use cauterization of such medicine after evacuation.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dyascorides says that when a sciatic vein is cauterized with horsehair, it must be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and anoint it with old oil, and place it on the fossa between the big toe and the little toe called the scrotum.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dry horsehair, and anointing it with fire until it becomes charcoal, place it on the linen cloth, and let it sit until it is stained; then repeat this process again, and do not stop doing so until you think that it has reached the spot just above the hunchback, where the pain is gone; and this type of cauterization is called "cautery of horsehair".
de la dolor dou dos	of the painful back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either by falling or by percussion or by too great evacuation, or by the appearance of something spread out cold matter, none of these similarities is worth cautery, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the sick person be void of fetid pills or other similarities, so that upon their back you make three lines signed with an incision, and in each line perform cautery or more according to virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and thus do the cautery as called "poins"; and if you see this, do III cauteries or IV at the clavicle middle incision according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease comes often to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow spine when it is straightened, and fear; and you will find in the lower back on the spine at the base and in its appearance that comes up on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and want to treat it, if you cauterize with the cautery of the cell according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cautery is purple on each part of the spine, increasing.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cauterize inside the spine at the puncture point one or two lines deep and so that the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment, keep the patient so that they are healthy as we have said, and guard so that you do not introduce cautery into a swollen gland which is in the grip of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	From the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is caused by swellings in each limb of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which they call "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicines, if it is cured with cautery in this way: make a poultice of cautery around the joint of the foot, and use olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a spot that you prick on the face of the foot, make a cautery all around the point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the groin and other joints, and this happens many times, make cautery on each groin 3 cauteries or 4 of each part, all around the olive oil cautery; and if you have need of more, do more, but do not hold your hand over the heat longer than until the specks of pus are dried.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the genitals and the back, administer the fire cautery that we have said in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, do pain into two fingers; and if there is no more pain in them, then apply pain to each joint and to the skin of the hand; and if the pains come down just on the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and some medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good governance and purge the phlegm, he will be made healthy by God's aid.
de la routure dou syfac	of the incision into a abscess.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When an abscess comes with ulcers and the bowels descend to the joints and it is new, it is advisable when you cure his wounds that he does not make use of them the next day; and he should use things that lighten his belly, so that the fevers come down from his belly. After that, have him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to pull his leg until the ulcers are healed, and tie it to your two hands, and sign that there is a sign like the half of a circle above the bone of the finger; then take out the cautery by this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and has stopped bleeding.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the bowels to their proper place; and let the physicians tie off the veins so they do not return; and work well on the patient, and put some linen and a servant above the knees, and another under the thigh that holds up the hands; then apply the cautery to the marked spot on all fingers, and the right hand and the left hand until you touch the bone, and if you don't hit it the first time, do so again another time until you reach the bone; and be cautious that the bowels will not escape when you perform the cautery; so as not to burn them; and thus let the patients not die from this, or any other sickness.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	Instruct the cautery to be subtle according to your size and that of the great ones as well; after three days' cure let the patient heal from the fire cautery with butter until the scab is shed; after the cure of other ointments until he is healed, and apply heat to the patient for 40 days on his back so that the wound is properly closed; and it is suitable that his nourishment be taken long enough, so that the boil does not burst when he is going to move about in rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wants to rise, apply a well-made bandage and wear it for 40 other days; and have good rest, so that he works little and avoids excessive drinking and eating, and speaking too loudly; and if you follow this teaching, then he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after your cutting treatment of the cautery.
de la routure dou ventre	of the cut on the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When cuts come in other places and are identified, and you see that they no longer grow, then do the cautery as its quantity demands, and burn off one-third of the wound; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the level of the incision and make a line for the width above the cut, and another below it; and with your finger press around the entire edge of the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and less severe.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, or from a fall or from injuring it, and the pain lasts for a long time, and medicine cures are useless, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery that is called "poins," and do the cauterizations according to the length of the limb, its thickness, and its weakness, and its virtue, and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it heals after the first cauterization, that is well; but if not, do another cauterization on that part, because often this type is such that it must move to the limb next to it, so that you make cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of incompetence
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The problem is treated with no success by cautery for great help, and the same malady that comes from the putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You cannot view this cauterizer, take precautions if the malady is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in division, and do not stay or remain, and doubt that corruption seeps into the entire patient, so make V cauteres on the head: i put the head anew, and the other towards the front at the end of the hair; and II over the II horns, and I behind under the hairy part; and hold your hand so long as the cauterizer comes to bone just until the scabs come out so that the vapors of large humors can come out; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et se li meselerie est partout espare;
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And knows that when you do more cauterization, you will cause more harm, and the patient will suffer; and knows that the patient does not feel pain from cauterization as much as they would if it were not infected.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is fitting that cauterization should be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in various ways with the iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment let him be left of flour powder mixed with honey and other remedies until he is made whole.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When an inflammation arises in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should do cauterization on the member according to its size and shape; and if the cauterization is inserted a little into the flesh of the wound, then treat it with bandages until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes they perform cautery with their hands and feet and back, at the end of the nerve that makes the member mute, and thus if it is removed the swelling; and no one enters into this without knowing the members and the openings of the moving bones of the body.
de albaras	of scars.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "scars" is aged, and medical knowledge does not help anything, then cauterize with cautery a little bit at first, according to the amount of the blood that flows out, until the flesh is removed, and it changes its color; then cure with flour of onions and lentils with olive oil and plantain leaves, and salt of gall and salt of almonds, each one in turn; and mix all together, and tie with a cloth, and let him eat as much as he can until he is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The doctor who pricks with fire
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the chancre comes at the beginning and you stop looking, prick it with fire that seems like a circle all around the turn of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the wise men say that you should prick fire at the middle of the chancre; and all think it not good, because I fear it will be ulcerous and corrupted, and I have never wanted to try it before, and there is no other remedy than to cut around with the fire called "circule", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers in dying or because of its abundance, or because the old man has aged (it means too much age) and he is weak with little blood, or because of his long illness; and you see him hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauterizations, after that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	She will soon die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you view her pierce with the fire cauterization, so that the cauterized form is like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the midst of this disease which is called "adubelati" so that the cauterization has pierced the liver, and it should be such that the patient feels pain on both sides in this manner so that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, so that he may be completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the burn cauterization by iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease that is called "corrodens", and it is no other than an injury to a limb, because it causes the limbs to rot as well as dry bones.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this sickness in one who can endure fire cautery together with the fire, then heat the cauterizes small and large according to what is fitting for the patient or the disease; after having cauterized all parts until you erradicate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, that which is corrupted should be cut out.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let him lie for three days, and put on his cauterized wounds to suffer from a firebreak with oil until the escharatures of the fire are cut out, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of bone-grown ulcers.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that a healthy child is born, it is good; and if not, then repeat the fire cautery on those who are left with corrupted wounds.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this condition is sometimes cured with medicine water instead of fire cautery; but all see that fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already said the cure of medicine water in its division: take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of worms that come to the bone
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that on the bone by chance there is born a disease which we call "clos" according to our intention, and it is a great thing to blame that causes the pain.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And there are two kinds of fire cauteries for this disease.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is that you heat the iron, just like a hair tie, and it is made of good iron to the size that can penetrate the nail from all parts, and it has subtle margins; after that put hot iron on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes out at the root of the nail; then let it be for three days so it starts to get rotten; then make an ointment of fresh marjoram ground with fat, and put the ointment on the whole nail, and the nail will come loose and will be despoiled of its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let his hair grow long and even.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted to frost of the body, and this happens in his hands and feet, so it is fitting that you apply fire cautery with hot water; and thus: take a rod made from iron or oak, or a needle of walnut, and place on the warts; and put the rod on until it pricks all around, then put a little warm water there, and hold your hand tight, and press the skin in turning so that the margin of the rod goes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep down till the root; and let the patient suffer a little from the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as is, and he will drain all out from his roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	In this manner do it after another, until you have searched through all those which are in the body, then treat the limbs that bind with strong bands.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for the quiver
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people are shivering with cold or fever, or with another ailment, it is fitting to make four cauteries or five above the spine on the back, one cautery between each spine; and one over the belly, and one in the region of the liver; let this stop the trembling, and hasten their recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of dry sores or ulcers
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No time do they appear without the body's internal baths, or dry sores/ulcers, that come from great corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to make cauterization upon each of these sores, a subtle cautery made from the wood of myrtle, with which the point is grasped by fire, or from the root of aristolochia long, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And at no time are the cauterizations made at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow again forward, but the superfluous things that come from them are broken, and they are healed; but it is necessary to do so after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often happens great bleeding of the artery that is cut at the wound, which comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or by cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Instruct the patient to wait until this happens when it has occurred to anyone, and then hasten to put your thumb index on the wound of the vein, and strain them very much so that they are not appeased underneath your thumb, and that no more gout is produced; then apply olive oil cautery in small and large sizes until they are all red; then apply heat I, whether great or little according to the wound and where the artery is routed, and put the cautery on that vein which you hold with your thumb, and keep it there until they no longer strain.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the fire has disappeared when you lift your thumb off the vein, and the cautery has cooled down, then take it hastily another cautery which is on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until they no longer strain; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is near, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the blood does not flow from the artery, it cannot be well stopped by oneself when the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four ways in which we have said: either through cautery, or extraction when it has not been treated, or with a strong tying of thread, or with medicines put on who have power to stop bleeding; and let it happen that they are bound and strained afterwards.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will put a stop to the swelling of the tightly bound limb or putting things on it, or other similar things, if they do not profit from this.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to him and he does not have any medicine or remedy, then let him put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until the swelling subsides from the wound and from the vein; and do not stir him, but let him be moistened with cold water often until he becomes very cold, so that his wounds become congealed and swollen, and then perform these operations in advance of what is needed to cauterize and use medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on treatments of cuts.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	As we have said in the first chapter, about any disease where it is necessary to cauter with fire or with medicine, and the causes and forms of cauterization; and I have placed that chapter at the foot of this same page, and I will go into this chapter by the same route so that those who find it will be easier to understand.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear boy, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cautery, and therefore it must be done with greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to enter into folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Because many ways of men come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	But some come who have been cured so quickly with their disease that they die easily due to the force of their own disease, and the great size of its evil; and for this one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these cases which you hear my sense, and say "wait, I am cured"; and the sick person is pitiful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not right that you only consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetise; and do not be too weak but rather wisely of what you are certain of and of what you have taken for yourselves; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick people so that salvation is converted; and that will help you to acquire a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear sons, Our Lord gives you good understanding and truth, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I instruct you on this chapter in devising by chapters, according to what is before or in front of the cautery chapter, which I have devised for you from the head joint to the joints, because you will find it easier to deal with that which you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Fill the full head with water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the child holds it too tightly to the head of the infant; and sometimes it comes from a return that no one knows.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness occur only in children, and at every time that I have seen it, the death has occurred; and therefore I think it is worth making the work more thorough.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	Et I saw the child because the joint was swollen with water, and the head became engorged every day until it could no longer sustain itself; and he believed so much that he was dead, and this swelling is assembled under the bone above his spleen, between the kidney and the bone; and wounds are of such a nature when the swelling is between the kidney and the bone, and abscesses are small, that you cut into the head with a large incision; and be so long as II of us, as much as we have seen, until the swelling runs out.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the swelling is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, cut two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the swelling is under the bone, and you see the signs that it affects both sides of the face, and the water spurts out when you press your hand inside, and this does not stop: then it is necessary to cut three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After straining the wounds of drapes and powders, and putting vinegar and oil in, and letting it go for so five days; then clean it, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head drain out, and give the patient dried meat a small amount of moisture until the limb is comforted and cured.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look at or open the size of the abscess and its assembly, because sometimes it's in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Measure then, when the abscess opens or is made open, and the inflammation of the water, and make the cut accordingly as you have the skill; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and give a generous amount of blood, so that the patient may die from the accumulation of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of flesh
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens that there is no disease which is called 'catarrh' in the eyes or on the skin, and the disease is old and medicine does not help, then the following remedy should be used: cut with cauterization as when you cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary that you cover the eyes so that the patient stares at his forehead; then rub him with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then stretch out the patient's neck with all the cloth; then look where the vein is rising, and check whether the tendons are in place next to the ears, and if they have come back; then tie the tendons with leather thongs; then cut one and both of them with a good spatumile two parts long until the vein just touches bone, and so that this be done through the wide space of the forehead.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	If you see this, pour out the spatula under the artery and strike on top, in cutting as is necessary to traverse.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it should be closed with a continuous downward flow of fire.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at sight, it is wise to measure out three times the space of two fingers, then mark and cut through the bone; for this is six, six fingers, and by chance a little more or less, according as the patient can bear it and the swelling of the artery; then look at the wound: if the point of the bone remains above the surface, do not cut again in that place, for it will be useless to make another incision, then strain the wound and bind it, and cure with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	The body leaves
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient body comes in and catarrh is present, due to moisture of tears and colds in the temples and old sores that resemble similar things, and he is treated with various medicines and remedies and none of these help him, we must extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize the ulcers, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes his hair grow behind his temples, and listens to the artery which opens up in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is little replied with heat as in very few men who are too cold; and if it is warmed, then he strips off his collar on the patient with some cloths, then rubs him with a rough cloth, and heats him with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then takes the spongy spatula of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Instruct the patient to scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then take it up at the top with pinches, and pull well from both sides that are under each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the needle, then cut from that side according to the quantity of the two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not cut, do not separate it without pain throughout everything.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take out the vein of six fingers, just three; and if the artery is large, it is fitting that you tie it in two levers of a double strong thread of silk, so there will be no hemorrhage before the wound heals, and it will come to pass again from the vein; then cut the superfluous part which is between the two levers at this same hour, and if you see, then cauterize with cautery knife just until the bones are cut; for that is the better work, if the patient has no fever and he is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is aid to finish the moistures: for this it is of greater help as moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, fill him with fresh wool and put on fine nets; and when you remove them, if he needs medicine dry that makes charcoal, and threads, until he is healed; and if without cutting the artery as often as you work, you will hurry by cautery, or take a wool of vitriol and the strain in your hand that it may not be stained; and if you do not have this present, put on the wool his dressing so that the veins are congealed, and raise the dressing with cold water until they cease, and bind as much as is necessary; for what must be drawn out and is more light in the extraction of the artery is cauterizing the vein of this cautery with two parts trenching, but the trenches should be well-spaced to ward off its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the instruments are too dark, he holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And he must have two knives in his hands, one of which is thick and large, and then when you take scissors made from iron the second time, put a hot iron on it until it comes close to the bone, cut the vein in two places; and let them be separated between the two incisions because there's no doubt in this cautery about all of it; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the eyelashes are falling into the veins that are above the forehead of the forceps, and he does not take any benefit from medicine that we make, and you see the patient's face turning red, and feel pain at the eyes as if from a burn; and the oil is cool and moist so that the hair of the eyelashes come out, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of the tears, if it requires this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Instruct the old healer to call this person 'cure contused', and you shall make a reenactment on the patient who has this illness by making their hair grow long at the front; then make three equal slits in the forehead, so one of them is like two fingers pressing down on the forehead from below, while the other two are like two fingers pressing above on the paper-like skin, and keep away from cutting the arteries that are located on the paper-like skin; and move your hand away from continuing to press on the two mandibles, and apply three stitches each on every wound through it; then apply a piece of sponge and a lot of drapery for cleaning, and use a good spatumile with two parts equal to this shape.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the first incision in the temple, make the second incision; and scrape all the wound between the two slits as far as the bone above, then apply another piece from the middle incision to the other side of the second incision, and then remove that spatumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If it is cut in the first wound with the instrument called "cultellary", and is very sharp from one side and the other, soft not cutting, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And cuts the costal bone towards the raw flesh at the wound, and the costal bone is soft towards the bone, and it presses hard until it comes to the middle wound.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And immediately cut the vessels that flow from the head towards the ears until the incision is continuous just as far as the opening of the wound; then another part make in the middle wound just as far as the other fault; and then extract the blood equally, press out the vein that has been taken; then put a soft cloth in each wound, and cover it with moist cloths in wine and oil and herbs, and keep away from swelling; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great quantities of water and vinegar, then the treatment of basilicon ointment with olive oil, and other cures for wounds, until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	They must hold their eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When they have a good cough accustomed to it, and you see the eyes darkened and reddened, and weakened vision, and the papillae burned; and the hairs fall out, and pain is felt in the head, and the patient sneezes; then from these accidents you see that those materials and this cough come only from many veins, and how the mother heals it, if there is a vein.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to raise his forehead, then make a great cut along the eyebrows.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision just to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move towards the side; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, then close between the two lips of the wound and put cotton wool and linen thread; then tie over drapery soaked in wine and oil, and beware of an abscess; when it is healed, it is necessary to rub the bone until it starts to come out, then treat with purgatives that make the bowels move.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of cochineal dye, and make it into a paste; and administer it to these wounds for the healing of all skin.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the evacuation of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ears is one of the four things: grains, or meat, or stone from the mine, or similar thing like metal; or seed, such as grasses, beans, fennel, or other things that flow out, like water and dregs, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes out of the ear stone or in some other manner of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows in the ear, if you put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, put on a small amount of violet oil or sesame oil, then perform the extraction. And let the stone be thrown back in the ear canal, and apply the cloth to the nostrils when it comes out, and place pieces of cloth or wool into the ear so that it goes above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often times the procedure comes about through this cure; and if it does not happen, then they perform the extraction with fine pins, so that it is in this form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it springs out with the pins, that is good; if not, then perform the extraction with an onion skin and a small double fold; and if it does not spring out by this, then make a pin of thorns and pour the head down into the pin or ear hole very tightly, so that it cannot enter through the pin; then pull out carefully, because often times it springs out as we have said; and if it does not come out in such manner, seize the sprout with a bit of it when you take hold of the ears, and put some cotton around; then press the sprout on the stone or whatever thing, and pull out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not avoid all these things that we have said, so hasten to pierce the ear thus before piercing the bone and causing spasms; and the manner of the incision is such that you first make the patient healthy from the head, and extract the blood according to the measure of his virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or where it hangs down; and the incision should be like a crescent moon until you come to the bone, then extract the bone with your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and the cure will last as long as he is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain that has grown and has swelled up, so administer the extraction; and if it cannot come out, so administer a small spatula in between them according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And instruct the patient to make a cut at that point.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make the cut when you think the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many cuts there; then take out small stitches and at the wound site, as we have said, so that the extraction may be gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water then it is best to vomit into the ear; and that the patient may use early condiments, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And also if it is swollen on the same ear or in the water.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it falls through for that reason, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If that's not the case, if you pierce many pieces according to the length of your head, and keep them light and warm, and put one or two pins in your ear, and stand on those feet on another foot, and freeze on another joint on the joint in the ear; and do not cease to do this of joint by joint until the water has all been drained out, and so will it fall out entirely; and if you see, pierce the joint, and put one of the pins back into the ear, and the other joint takes fire as long as that one is ardent; then again make another piece of joints as long as the water drains out, as we have said in the piercing.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the earlobe, if it is of small size, like a wart and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if it is of large size, which can be felt, extract the prickly flesh; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When you are cutting out the worms from the ears, in order to cure it as we have said in division and when treating dilations, if the cure does not profit, so that you look at the ear towards the sun: if there is no worm visible, then take sharp needles; and if none are seen, then pierce with a pin of this sort, because this is its form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it may be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And pour the most subtle head in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then strike to form at the whole ear; do this often until all the veins appear.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	But if they do not come out when you apply heat in the ear canal as I have said in the cutting of stones; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations as the ancients have used in the removal of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear canal with this instrument, because here is the shape that you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if it is of silver or of lead cut off near the small passages, and on top over it to distill; and for pressing in the distillation into the instrument well-made for that, and if you see a razor and blow into the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicine in the canal; and the ear should be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or just about to come out of the ear; and it will feel good to the patient inside; and let them not be too cold, because the medicines would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the bursting of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have a small hole in the ear; and this same thing happens to adults by bursting of wounds or by burning something inside the ear, and this bursting often occurs within the ear so thoroughly that one cannot see it; and sometimes it has a large hole, and the ear is very swollen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	This one which occurs within the ear so thoroughly that one cannot see it is because of bad humors in many dispositions, and when you look inside, it is necessary to put the patient's ear to the sun; and observe: if you see pus or discharge apparent, then the wound has a certain shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And if it is bloody and trenchant in front and behind the ear, but does not burst the ear; or if the pus or blood is from an ear injury, if you have fine needle points, and carefully prick gently until that blood is entirely dried.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	If the swelling is in the ear, then take a fine needle lighter and place it on the flesh of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the swelling which the sick feel a great pain in the ear, prick lightly, and guard that you do not press the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tent according to its size and shape, and apply ointment Egyptian.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do nothing on any day until the wound is closed, or you take a tent and apply ointment in rosewater, and powder with vitriol broken; and if you see that the ear is swollen, cover it so that you treat the tent and remove another moist tent made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat as long as he is cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the blood comes to flow again, then plunge an sponge and wring it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that can relieve bleeding from the flow which are for treating oozings.
de la char des papieres	from the flesh of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	To the ulcers that come from paper skin when they are moist and dry, if it is fitting to extend them with tongs and tweezers, and cut with a spatula of its roots; then put on it vinegar.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it does not peel off, if you cauterize the lenticular skin with fine cautery, and cauterize after incising is useless; and many times repair, since nothing stays from its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are scorched and do not return again.
de la gresle	From the shoe.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	There are times when some things that look like hair in the eyes come to paper, which is called "grandine" disease, because of their shape and hardness; and this is a mixture of moisture great on top and below the paper; the remedies are such: take care if the grandine moves from one side and the other, and it's a light thing to know; do then make a wide cut, then scorch each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and pound.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you can't cover it by piercing the paper at least a little, it will cause no harm to the patient; and if the cut is large, if the assembly has a seam, and treat the cure until it becomes sound; and if it's small, don't do anything with force, because the ointments restore it immediately and annoy the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the hair is falling into the ear, towards the upper part, let the paper turn and look at the dirt; if it reaches to one pinched finger, cut it off and press hard from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by the incision, nothing will be disturbed; and when the dirt is cut off, wash away the dirty oil of salted water, and cure the patient until he recovers from this disease.
de la graisse des eulz	From the grease of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	This is a grease that clings to the threads of paper above, and it happens more often in children who have no one to care for them, and causes great suffering to their eyes, and they come with catarrhes in the mornings, and cannot see the light of the sun because their tears obstruct their eyes; and because of this they lie on their faces until death, and sleep on, and their skin is moist below their eyebrows that are infected by the exinach which seeps into the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint with your hands and feel the swelling inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your healthy one; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of swelling in each part, and put it there; and press with your hands from both sides so that the swelling is assembled inside the circle; then make a cut at the midpoint of the swelling, cutting a wide slit, not greater than the wound you made on the vein; and let the skin hang down until you see the swelling; and in other situations, comes the swelling out of the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take out the bandage then to one piece of cloth charpie between your two shoulders at all times and turn your hand to right and left so that it is spread; and be careful not to add anything in the wound, lest you come near the whole spectrum until now, lest you burn it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extraction is not made in the beginning of the wound, close a little of the wound lightly until it appears; then cut as we have said, then dress with cloth in easy and wet manner, and put on the patient, and tie up with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such men who break the silken thread and place it in order to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to a swollen joint, so that the patient is being treated with emplaster until he is well.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of paper are born on a place other than their nature, and become wrinkled, if they prick at the eyes, and cause various kinds of illnesses such as tearing and swellings of the paper and albugen, until it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and the cure is in four ways: either by cautery with fire, or according to what is before or in the chapter of cautery medicine, and is done either by incision and suturing or by tying, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your own hand; then turn the paper with oil at your left hand; if it turns over, it is good; if not, prick one needle into all the hairs above. Either cut along the edge of the paper where the hairs grow out from those hairs, and pull the thread upwards to the entire width, from the great tear to the small; then remove the thread, and put a small cloth of linen and a drapery under the paper; then draw on the paper an image of an ash, just like the horn of myrtle, as you see it rise up in size; and it is necessary that the figures be according to the quantity you see the paper increase by.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et if there is someone who has a special need, on cuts a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is soft; then you do it all over the spatumile above the two lines that you have signed, and start with a large needle from just below small; and make one of the incisions near the natural hairs in the growth of a root, then pour some oil on one of the two angles of beauty, then scrape everything; then assemble the two lips to a stitch of an awl with all the fine yarns of flax, and wipe out the blood, and do it dry the excess flesh of the filaments above the two sorrows in all sorts of sticky things, if you see this done; or if not, you don't have to care, then leave the stitch and the filaments just for three days or four.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut off that which overhangs because of small, even, equal parts according to its shape.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tongs firmly, and that is not even, then prick an arrow or take a thread and tie it to the figure; and then tie another thread around the larger part and the smaller one, and assemble them evenly between your two fingers; then bind your hand evenly, and bind all the skin on which you have marked, just as we said before, then assemble both cheeks of the wound by stitching, and cure until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then clean it with cypress and similar ointments soothing; and sometimes happens that the hair of the patient's body are converted: so it is advisable to use what we have said about the incision; but the stitches in one and both are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the chains is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the flesh inside as I have said, and then make two hinges by art, and two subtle strings so long as the paper and the large space of the spatulum are; and cut at two fingers of two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what overhangs from the paper of oil, and strain the two hinges of the two parts together; and let it be in this way for some days, and the skin that was strained will harden and dry and become thick, so that it feels by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late and the cut has some strength, then treat him until he is sane; and when the wound is sewn up and the paper is lifted, and the hair will no longer be pulled; and this is the form of the two hinges that you make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Instruct the patient to prick at their hair, which has grown long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold your eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Et if the arrow is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, so treat the arrow below to the length you have ordered, until the arrow comes forth from the part that has been perforated, and you see it through your vision of oil; then so treat the arrow and the thread, and close the eye and let him rest two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the arrow appears above; and if the hairs are small, so accompany one long hair from the neck with natural nature, and raise them with that which you leave, until they are stretched out and then lifted.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil's spoilage
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease is called "alearcati" or the spoilage comes to the oil, there are two kinds of it: one natural and one unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by sudden injury or cutting or cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of treating the injury is that you cut open the scar, and serve the lips, and put in tenters of linen, and tie so long as it is healing; and it is not advisable to use only in the treatment of things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but to work with softening things, like fenugreek; and boiled rosewater or fat, and seeds of flax are cooked, and ointments made from yolk fondue in any oil, and put a tent over it, and then cure.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you guard yourself not to take it according to the form in which it was before; and all the injuries we have mentioned are only for the purpose of describing this disease, that it may return according to the same form as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the fat that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is outside, and truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the path of the work in the body is such that if you prick an artery with an awl, because it has one thread double, and the stitch in the fat, and you pierce from the left shoulder side to the right, so the thread veines into two joints of the fat; then pull the char above all at the spot where the awl is, and strike with a span long.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of paper returns according to what is desired, it is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the wound, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side within the paper; and so that the joints of the two cuts meet at the angles of the incision you made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as if of a letter with the non "I griesche"; then cut out that char, according to the quantity its sides are below, from what is left of the paper, then join the two parts sewn, and the cost of a thread of linen; then the cure of what we have said of mollifying medicines and poultices, until he is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et if the sickness comes from cutting or piercing or cautery, so it is fitting that you cut a plain incision below the hairs of the paper; and according to what I have said; then sew between the two fingers of a belt, as I said; and one must do the work according to the shape of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare an engine of all kinds of poor skill so that it may return the figure to its natural shape; and the sick themselves, according to what they require of work and treatment for many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	and suddenly from the paper.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	As soon as this suture occurs in the hands in a certain manner, where the paper is stuck with oil white and cannot move or do its natural works, so it is fitting then that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and sew from the top, until you copy what is good to the spatumile fine, which should not be too rough nor too thin, so that the patient can suffer neither too much irritation nor burn the oil; and make your incision, with which you scrape that assembly lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural shape; and it is all healed that assembly, and no time ever in the sickly oil salted, and washed with warm water, and vinegar; then put a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and put the woolen oil on top of it soft, soaked in milk, and for three days use only colic and similar things until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the uncleanliness of oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	That the itch of oil is in two manners: it is like a nervousness and seems to be on thick skin, and another that is not nervous but resembles frozen milky white substance; when touched with iron and cooked pan after pricking, it will not come out; and both seem to start towards the great vein, and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and all the light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of cutting is that the sick man puts his head on a clean cloth, then opens his eyes; and lifts paper with his hand, then cuts the itch as pinpricks of small stitches, and stretches it upwards; then takes an awl, and puts some horsehair, or vetch, or oxhair, in it, and makes a strong thread; and doubles the point of the awl a little, and inserts it into the itch, and pokes through all the awl, and ties the itch to a string and stretches it upwards, and scrapes off at all the hair on the cost of the itch that causes itching and pus on the hair just above the head; then cuts the remaining part in the root of the vein up to the small, subtle spanile, with fine forces, and leaves the natural nature of the vein, if the blood does not come out according to custom; and sometimes it only stretches to a single nodule, and to the thread, as we have said; then scrapes off at all the spanile soft because of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the suture does not touch the raw flesh and breaks it, and that the lancet is not felt; and after the incision, take a little bit of sawdust in oil and put it at the wound, and let it sit on the neck until the next day; then the doctor will take care of what needs to be done so that he may heal.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	But if the finger is not sensitive, and you cannot prick it with the needle, and the nails will not enter, this resemblance of an ingrown nail often happens due to medicine; and when I have explained it in the division, if you see that it covers, then apply oil to the patient, and take the suture lightly, a little bit of good matter according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And take the ingrown nail beneath gently, and if you see that it shrinks at all and the reason comes to press, then distill from your mouth into the oil, a collier made of litargire and red wine-seed, and let the oil sit on the neck until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same operation, until it is entirely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against you in the oil, as with a wound, then take the ointment and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed; then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the skin is marred by great suffering in the oil at night, and if it suppurates in an abscess, and you cut into one part but not entirely, so that no blood comes forth; then distill into the oil a red vinegar, which is made from quicksilver.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the flesh born on the eyelid.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And sometimes flesh does not appear at all on certain people, and they cover the eyelid and restrain it with paper and linen as if to conceal, and it seems like a rose of balsam; and wounds are made so that the patient puts their head under the healthy one, then they cut the eyes, and make whole all that flesh is suitable for such, and support with strength; then cut the first flesh, and go completely cutting at the razor until to the end, and guard that you do not bleed the oil on the work; and as in the incision of the scab we have said, as small forces as one ought to oint, as if it forms after this chapter shows; and when the incision is completed and all flesh cut out, then employ the oil of silk or distill vinegar red and similar medicines corrosives, and put on the oil cotton with linen wool, so that you are sure of an abscess; and if it does not come, and they say without cloth covering them, and you doubt of an abscess, so leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing medicines for abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and do thus put flesh covered in oil by this semblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But everyone should know that you must alleviate the cure for each weak person, and by the natural way and also the accidental one, in the presence of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this limb is suffering from that operation.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These veins are red and covered on the skin, and they hold back their own work and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The master is therefore to first examine whether the vein is swollen, if so, and there is no other disease of fire than the swelling; then do it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on a clean cloth, then suspend those veins until one hour according to his wisdom, and cut them at that precise moment into thin strips
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two on one side by degree in the four according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then tie off those veins with subtle forces, and suck out the blood after another, until you see remove the veins' force from the oil; and guard that you do not prick the oil at the tips of the lancets, and do this work in the hour of noon before the sun, being very fervent in your work so that you do not bleed too much; and when you have done this, if you distill oil of rue and red into it to corrupt what remains at the wound.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to tie off all that in that hour, then apply plaster on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are assuaged, and secure yourself against an abscess hot, then resume according to this manner as long as he is healed.
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The artery so-called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and medicine according to what I said before, and it is not cured, there is an infection in it that you cut through above the abscess, where it must die, and take out all the moisture that's in it, until the bones are exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, if it has the shape of that which is; and is called "aspere chief", and must be made from iron at the head where it is found, and pointed like a nail as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put the bone of the corrupted bone on top of it, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand just enough to know that this corruption has dried up; and do this only once, then restore the bone with medicinal extracts.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the head of the shoulder is swollen and painful, and the bowels are swollen, and it remains so for 40 days, and does not heal and is not treated with an incision, then no accidents happen to the patient, he is safe. If this is not the case, if there is no other remedy but to return the fistula to the perforated nose according to this form: and you discover a second time by iron, and by medicines acute, when it heals discover so that you find in iron three angles, and the fistula be attenuated up to the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the head of the lance on the bone of the shoulder blade, and remove your hand from the wound a little, then turn around to the forest as far as you can penetrate the bone and feel that the patient is coming in with his hand over his nose; and then restore the lance with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the swellings come out and harden, take the material to the nose; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Of the issue of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open and not at all disturbed, nor alleviated by the head, if it is necessary to bind the patient; then apply salve, then put hot poultices or hawthorn to cause vomiting, then make a poultice of oil mixed with ice and Aloe and frankincense and sarcocolch, and then strain the oil, and apply the ointment on gauze and drapery; and the way of the drapery is that you take soft gauze, double each one in four, and then put one over the other according to the quantity that the eyes have need; then strain by a strong thread from above, and reapply the poultices to cause vomiting again; then remove the poultices and leave the oil strained every day and night, and if it binds the patient, do so; but if you see the oil healing, it is good; but if not, then reapply the ointment and the gauze and the poultice until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Drop of fallen hair
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a thread of hair breaks in the web, then comes out, and comes forth from the paper as if it were a grain of resin, and it is frightening to see; therefore, if you cover your eyes, the wound is like such that you poke an needle into the root of the part below just beneath this above, then poke another needle where there is double thread from the side of the larynx; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle as it is according to the arrangement; then take out the leaden thread and tie a part of the web together, and tie it well, then pull out the needle and put on oil linseed moistened with a great quantity of water; and let it be so long that the threads bind with the web, and cure the oil for things comforting until the wound is healed; and at no time will the wound be held by the web each one part of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great appearance, then he should prick in the spot below at the root of the hair, and clean away the moisture, and descend the eyes, and enter so soon; then extract as soon as it is safe.
de la bowe de l’oil	of oil from the bowel.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This illness called 'alcunnati' is nothing but the oil-filled bowel assembled like a liquid descending, and not actual water; and in its appearance as follows, you should sit your patient on that prepared seat straight, then take the head between your hands of two parts, and let it move until you see the bowel coming to the top at your eyes; then push inside, do not descend, but hold together the lightness, and see how the patient is going as usual; and if it does not descend downwards, know that it's not water, and if the bowels are assembled in such a manner as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you sit the patient between your hands, then take the small spatumile and make above the eyebrow by continuing the conjunctive with the eye skin and the crown; until it bleeds and when it is out, distill in hot oil mixed with warm honey or fenugreek, or boil them and then be cured of another cure till she is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the likenesses of water in cutting, and that which is needed to pierce; if in operation according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands crossed, over the fire by the sun, and tie tight the good oil; then put on your left hand the paper of oil to your left eye if they are to the left, or to your right hand if they are to the right; then take in your right hand if they are to the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if they are to the right. Then put the point of the instrument near the crown by the size of a finger in that blistering part of the oil at the lower corner near the bone; then push the instrument which is called "almagda" nicely, and turn your hand until it pierces into the blistered part of the oil, and feel when almagda comes to the empty place; and it is necessary that the measure of almagda be exactly the full length of the measure of the space from the pit of the nose to the end of the nostril; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the eye skin, then put the instrument just next to it or where the oil is, then express it on one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If they are now bleeding, so he sees the patient before him and the instrument on his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and if the bleeding starts again on the second vein, put the force with the instrument, and when it is stuck in there and does not rise, gently remove all that's left of flesh by turning his hand slightly around; then put back a little blood into the wound, and clean out its oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put the oil-stained cloth or a moist linen in olive oil and plenty of wine, and bind with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	So, and for those of our time, let us put on a common broth with plenty of wine.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the arm cannot enter into the oil because of its hardness, for it has many people who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you take hold of the instrument which is called "alberit", for this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then cut the conjunctive alone, and do not go too deeply into it, but make the new one subtle, then pour in oil, as we have said; and on the completion of the work, bring to the patient the doctor who is coming along with him, since he lies on his back in the dark room; and you should be careful of all movements, and give him light food, and do not move his head or right arm or left arm, and you should bind him according to his disposition, every third day; then release him in that same dark house, and examine his eye, and let him see some things, and then he is released for the seventh day; and it is not fitting to make this in the room of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary to lighten it, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	In case of an abscessed limb comes, that you remove the pus on the seventh day, and take heed of the remedy for the abscess; and when it is soothed, then remove the eye and put on its face a poultice to cover each day, and be returned to that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then come the people from that place, and it will transpire in its cases; and know that no disciples should interfere with this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Irah, who said that in some other land they performed the operation of making an almagda incision, because it would cause the water to flow, but I never saw anyone from our land or knew about it in ancient books; and by chance, perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of alchemy, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are made from pure tin:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the head of this same subtlety, and the behind in three angles of inflammation.
de la char sor le neis	of the blackness on the skin.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	There are no times when chills occur in different ways, because there are some that resemble scorpions to the point of being pressed; and if they have such or their chill is covered with a foreign color, and their cold is like the color of bone.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Therefore in those chills that are cold and not covered, it is necessary to seat the patient between your hands against the sun; open their nostrils, and let their chest rest on these chills, and try to calm them; for until you can sustain yourself with the subtle powder of a certain part, as long as you know that this chill is entirely gone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is any remaining thing that cannot be covered, if you will put all sorts of subtle and light substances inside it, so that it does not stay; and if it does not swell without being incised, or has an abscess on the feet, if you cut it as it seems to you; and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize them until they are stained and become all bones, then purify either with vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If there is no poultice and moistors come just to the face, know that he is cured; and if moistors pierce as it seems fitting, know that there is a bone exposed in the marrow of the above, because the substances do not come for cutting: therefore it is necessary to put a thread of linen one small size, and made from our hands, and with some space in between; and place the patient's fingers on the thread in his nails so weak, and rub in odorant until it comes out by the thread into the mouth; and this is often done to children in schools, and it is a light thing for one who wants to do it. Then hold the head that comes from the thread with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other as we are with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Instruct the patient to do this as long as you know that no one has corrupted the flesh of the child then take the son, suck the wound, and anoint the head in Egyptian oil, and put it directly on the bone so as before; do this for 3 days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the flesh; and then put a poultice of some kind for several days until it is healed, and if he has need of dried medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, because one distills oils and medicines into the poultice:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or lead, resembling a lampshade, as like a poultice, and conduct it thus; and if you see it, do a poultice closed, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have a piece of cloth on the head to hold it while one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the sword near the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Sometimes the head of the neck develops a disease called "telul" and it grows and becomes great abscesses, visible to the sight; and because of this one must take care to apply a poultice at the beginning, with hot medicine or cautery; and if it is delayed for too long and it becomes large, one should be careful and treat it with wax color, powdered powder: but do not touch it with iron because that is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut it once it brings great evil to the patient; and if the abscess is soft touch, not of wax color, and you see what can be covered, then open the patient's mouth and apply the poultice with fear, and treat the abscess as dry things and restraint.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nails are struck and crushed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	So that when some continuation of solution comes to one of these overgrown cartilages, it is not enjoyed at all, whether in any person.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to look at this thing in order to see if the wound is fresh with all its sanguis; and then add two lips together with a seam, then treat him until he recovers; and if the lips are devoured on one side and another, it is necessary that you burn all the parts of his flesh so that they heal, then assemble the two lips together with a seam, tie it up, and powder on powdered dragon blood, and incense broken; and put on the powders a piece of melted emplastrum of strong or other emplastrum bonding, and leave him to take effect until he takes his strength back, then treat him with ointment until he is recovered.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the sewing on the belly; or with thread, as I told you.
des apostemes des levres	of swellings of the lips.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	With the help of the hands, there is often a swelling in the lips, like grains of sand, small and larger ones. So it must be that you turn back the lips, and split each one apart, and take out with pincers, and cut into each part; then apply the new to the incision with vitriol broken, until the wound is stained; and then clean the area, and cure the area of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the gums.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
des sordens	From the sound
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Never are the molars assembled in their place at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, with rough and painful surfaces; and never do black and yellow teeth and roots occur until corruption comes to the gum, and they become smelly. So it is fitting that you have the patient sit between your hands, and his molars be in your sight, so that you can remove them when the cracks appear, unless anything remains. And then apply a mixture of balsam and verdigris, and yellowing and other colors, until they are smooth; and if it is determined to be at the first cause, it is good; but if not, make another attempt on the second day and the third day, until you have removed all of them. Note that teeth need various forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work shows, because the razors which remove teeth have other forms than those which remove between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait as long as you can before taking it out, because this should not be done to me; for it is a very high substance and therefore we have no excuse to delay.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is forced to take it out, if you want to be certain of the tooth's vitality.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain of the patient makes them think it's a rotten tooth, and takes out the good tooth; and one should not take away the pain at all, in case it is the bad tooth, for we have already tried that with other doctors; and when you are certain about the vitality of the tooth, it is necessary to scratch around the tooth with a sharp instrument, very strongly to protect the gums from all sides; then extract the tooth with your two hands or pincers finely at first, until they are well cleaned, and afterwards firmly fasten them; and put the patient's teeth between your own shoulders, so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth from the cheek directly, and if it doesn't fly out, take any of these instruments and put them inside each side lightly, and move them as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is impacted and must be pulled, it is advisable to fill the socket with cloth in that place where the wound is; and if you tie it subtlety with forceps, so that it does not break while being pulled; and it is wise to apply great care over the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient when the root becomes infected, causing greater pains than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful that you do not make the same mistakes as the ignorant physicians, who by their haste and boldness break the cartilage every time, and do not bring us any of those things we have said; but sometimes they come through the cause of great illness due to the roots that remain, or by breaking the cartilage, just as we have often wanted; and when the tooth is loose, wash it with vinegar or ale and wine; and if blood comes, then employ the liver of vitriol, because it has happened that way, and if this does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the ulcers are such that, when one swallows saliva first, they are long and pointed with large roots, which do not double back when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And are long roots if they do not bend when pulled, and are thick limbs well made, and have teeth to hold them in place.
de la racine des dens	of the tooth root
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root is held in place by pulling, it is to be put on with a wet cotton cloth soaked in butter every day or twice.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	so long as the limb is moist, then put in the tongs called "algefri", because the joint seems like a tooth; and they are made just like a file, which is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out from all these ties, so it is fitting that you uncover the whole chariot around the root, and put the instrument which is called "althal", namely palm, in order to make this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it breaks and is large whether or not it does not break, and the root jumps because of this, that is good; but if so, then help with all the instruments, for surely the forms will come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it is helped by this instrument which has two veins, then surely the form will be:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front in the region of the teeth, and from this instrument which seems like great pincers, whose form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Instruct the surgeon to use this instrument with extreme care so it does not break; and know that many instruments of bone are; and also other instruments which should be known but are not told; for the wise masters subtle will find their own instrument according to what works on those patients, because there is a diversity among such cases, and if they do not work when they hit bone or another part, in order not to break, so that you know the instruments needed, which I have told you, and help with gestures, for this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Let them be large and well-held to hold the bone tightly without breaking, but so that it can be held and extracted; and then restore the patient with medicines suitable for him, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, if the physician has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear and do not fit according to their natural body form, and their shape is ugly, and especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know whether the teeth are new after the tooth, and are not in the right place, and one cannot put them in or fix them: then the extraction; and if they are attached with the tooth, so take this instrument of the kind shown here, which resembles a small beak, and made of good iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And cut the gum with a small instrument daily because of the hardness of the tooth, and in order not to move the other teeth, if it appears that you can put it in, take some kind of glue as shown here.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also as the glue for which one makes needles; and cut the gum with a small instrument daily lightly, so that it does not move until it chisels; then smooth out the surface at the end of all rasping, if the teeth are too sharp and they bleed on the tongue, you must file them until they are even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth are loose, or by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press down on this that he chews less than before, and you cure them with medicines restraining, these do not work; if they must be restrained with a thread of gold, for silver threads become green and rot, but gold does not move at all; and whether the threads are too thin or too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are loose, take the thread and put it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the pins between my teeth, as many as there are or more, until you find the healthy tooth on the other side with certainty; then continue covering just where you started, and gently pull your hand so that it does not move at all; and be careful to bind loosely next to the root of the tooth if he cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Instruct the patient to cut the nails with a pair of tongs, and assemble them, and put them between sound teeth, so that they do not bite the tongue; and then let them be tight until they can endure no longer, and if they break, or the filaments come out, secure it with another filament; and leave him thus bound for as long as he can endure, and this is the form of the nails and the figure of the adjustment of two sound teeth and two crooked ones, so that you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, fresh as new, just like we said; and do not put anyone who is not skilled and knowledgeable into this work; and never have a fake tooth made from an animal's bone, and put one in the socket where the defect is, and bind it tight as we have said, and leave him bound for such a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never is there a ligament that comes from beneath the tongue or is of nature, unless it is so; or by accident of a wound that heals; and the injuries are such that you must open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your own, and lift the tongue; then cut the nerve tendon on the large side, until the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there's any hardness or scar tissue, and it's a sudden wound, then inject an onion juice and cut the large tendon; and make sure the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is beneath; and when you have done this, lift the head on hot rose water and air, or cold water, then place a linen bandage under the tongue. Every night, each patient will be able to heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	If the wound from the fire comes, apply vinegar on the skin; and if it does not come to life, cauterize with cautery, which is good for this; then treat with another remedy until it is sane.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see pus of color, whether red or black or hardened, since the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, because it is a chancre; and if it inclines to blisters and there is moisture, then scrape the ulcer, and make an opening from one side and the other; and if it does not come to life on its own, apply vinegar until it is stained, then return to its original state until you treat with all force; then lift the limb gently and carefully, and treat with other remedies until it is sane.
des apostemes de la gorge	Evacuation of abscesses from the throat.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	There is no occasion of the throat having boils which are called "godath", and when we call them by name properly, and as we have said in division, they do not become healthy if you watch out: if it's abscesses that last for a little sense and a little flesh color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, just as for the evacuation of blood; but let it stay until it dies, and then you will separate it, or it will break apart on its own; and if it is white in color again, and the root is subtle, have prepared a tool to cover it, but first examine whether the abscesses are closed and quiet.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his joints be healthy, and he open his mouth and let the servant press the sergent between his hands, and push the tongue downward towards the instrument, for this is the form; and it shall be made of silver or of fine gold just like our scales.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue to all of this instrument, and you see the abscess, if take the needle and prick in the walnut, and pull it up above what you can; and take no other thing from the linen with, then cut to the instrument, for this is the form that seems like force; and look at the chief, which are curved, one side on top of the other, and they are very good, and it is made of iron or silver.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument before it, then take a pair of tongs, because this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And so cut in one part, and the other part too; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot and cold water, and hot and mild water as well, and if blood is coming out, then gargarize the patient with warm or scalded pomace of green apples, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; and when cured, wait for a while; but sometimes new abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them accordingly as they are bound together.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, which is to say the small joint; and I had well closed up the entire throat so that she could not breathe through the obstructed passage, and nor could she eat or drink, and she died if she stayed like that for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses are raised so high that they have been forced to break two times by two wounds on the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	So I stuck to it and made a cut on one side, then the fire was applied, and a large portion of bow (probably a thread or cord) was used. Then another cut was made in the other neck wound, and the swelling was pressed against the tongue; afterwards a stitch was put into these abscesses, and part of it was cut out, and only a little blood came out. And so I closed the conduit to the throat for the woman, and now she began to drink cool water and wine, and did not stop cutting at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess kept recurring, and filled the vein again as much as it had been emptied, until it became very big; then I removed it and cauterized inside the throat: thus it remained stationary for some time; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to them afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the vein descends to the eye and it is swollen and prolonged, if it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is too large and rounded, then it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cut in the same way as we have said in division, and the cure does not benefit from it, and you see that the arrow marks are smoothed out, and it is subtle, then it is advisable to copy; and the one that is rounded and not prolonged; and if it is sanguine or of a foul color or black, then you should bleed from the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner in which I have said, of its size and shape, you should sit the patient in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument with which we made note previously; then prick into the eye, and pull it away, and cut twice at the two almond marks.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Instruct the patient to cover no more than the natural surplus, for if you cover more, it grieves your voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the cutting of the two almonds, and heal until she is cured.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, it is advisable to use a fire engine at the cauterying of the painful senses.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is wet water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient puts his head on the healthy one, and then presses the tongue with the instrument we have said in the cautery chapter, and mixes with hot water shoe leather, if it is not too thick or too clear; and with this edge of the instrument, there is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to put a hair from his head or an object of metal in the mouth, so that the ointment of the cautery falls onto it and stays there; for if they are not attached to their chest, the saliva and mucus run into his mouth from the medicine, which does not descend to the throat, nor does it pass through the bile; then take hold of all the medicine and press upon the wound, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it dry and the stinging of the medicine is calmed; and if you see that, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and pour the instrument into the can with the cotton on top, until the cotton sticks to the wound; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry, and cast it after four days or five; if you have need to reapply the cautery of the medicine, so reapply it, and after applying the cautery clean it around the wound with cotton soaked in butter, and purify what is around the medicine.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery. If it is cured with smoke according to this method, take calamondin and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put them all together in an I pot, and then mix them, and make a boil; and let the pots be well glazed with hot earth, and add to each pot a small instrument according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it can be of silver or lead, and one of the pins stuck into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises up to the eye through the nose, until the eye is numbed; after that, repeat it frequently, until the eye dries out, and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the eruption of an abscess, because many things happen; and do not do this except when the abscess is running down.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	If the instrument is not present, take a candle and insert a needle of fire into the head, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the needle of fire will not weigh down the vapor much, and it is a good treatment together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Sometimes it happens at the throat with or without a splinter of fishbone, or any other thing; therefore you should treat what you see, and press the tongue against the sun for the entire length of the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and when whatever is in there does not show up and returns to the throat, it is good to make the patient vomit so that the meat may be cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing burns from vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of bread, or a root of lettuce, or a slice of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then cut it; and when it comes out, it will burn, and then cut it again; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Instruct the straitjacketed so as to let it enter more easily into the throat if possible, and lift the head higher up in order that it may be easier to go down; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest its life comes or else you burst the bone within; and make sure that the patient does not push against the instrument, because he sees it is rusty; if it bursts, then push all of the way with the same instrument until it is finished.
de la sansue de la gorge	about the cutting of the throat.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no medicine for cutting the throat, as I have said in division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit at all, then look into the patient's neck in the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the wound, so the arrow has come out at its small end, or you have fine tongs that are worth it.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If this is not worth it, take a caustic horsehair, and put the bottle in the throat of the sick person, then pour or touch the caustic horsehair to the warm metal, and do it often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the sick person suffers from water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full goblet of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in such that it is swallowed from ear to ear, and move it with one's hand often; and as soon as the wound feels the water, let it be vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if she does not vomit as we have said, then perfume the sick person with asafoetida, at the instrument which I spoke of in the fumigation of the ear; do this many times, for she will vomit like a pig.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, and the method of fumigation is that you take a container or it has charcoal holes, and the cover is covered with a sieve pierced in the middle, and in that hole are the keys of the instrument; then you put your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth so that the smoke does not enter, but comes just there; and now the cough will start, and if it does not come, you repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient suffers from thirst, and eats foul and bad things, and does not drink any water; and therefore they are cured by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument by which you treat the abscess is that when it can be seen, resembles a pair of curved tongs to enter into the throat; and has a resemblance to the mouth of an eagle, and has roughness like lime, so that what it takes in cannot release it; and thus is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The physicians who treat abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many kinds of abscesses, just as is remembered in this book from both before and after, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two kinds, one being similar to the other, and it is due to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is for when they are inside or in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	because the abscesses in the head are different from those on the lower jaw, and the abscesses of the shoulder bone are different from those that occur in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if you do not cut at abscesses until the bowel is dead according to its completion; and if of such as it is necessary to cut them while they are believed to be dying, and do not die according to their completion, just like those that occur near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess comes from the joints, and one leaves it there until it is full of pus, by chance if it infects the ligament and nerve of the joint, because that is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is at the main limb and if you wait until it dies before making a perforation, it will harm the principal member; or if it's at the foundation, if you pierce there also, then it will kill. It is not advisable to pierce an abscess when one believes that digestion has been completed, for fires that are near the foundation will burst forth and cause pus to accumulate inside, and create a fistula, and it cannot be healed in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the site of the perforation of the abscess which will lead to death according to completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the separation from fever, and the reduction in pain and redness, and the gentle movement and the sharpening of the chief of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation at a location more dependent on the abscess, where it opens, and not too high on the body, because if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or joints, nerves, or arteries, or all those locations that are equal to them and have no pressure.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those joints that are swollen, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And if there is an abscess in the jawbone, so that it will be left open until it has been fully digested and confirmed, just as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	Because if you pierce into it, the body will swell with the blood from it, and it is full of much filth; and by chance, the lips and the fundament become hard.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess that must be pierced according to the size of the body, according to how much it needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	It is necessary that you bring forth small abscesses, small punctures; and large abscesses, large punctures; and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is wise to sew the wound, when it has become as thin as a cloth, so that it may be softened, then it is done in the same way as one makes for the nose: and if there are such as are split into three angles, and those whose punctures are made like the horn of myrtle, like abscesses from arrows; and if there are others with which you make a circular cut, and other shapes and sizes, and seeming cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, as an abscess is soft and superficial, it is necessary to pierce them plainly; and if the abscess is large, and has collected much pus, and you pierce, so that you don't take out all of it in this hour, but only part of it; then stop the abscess just next to where it was the day before, then do not touch anything around it; do this repeatedly from one place to another, until the pus is all gone; meanwhile if the patient has weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man decrepit with age.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	But you must hope for the worst-case scenario at all times with the outcome of the pus, so that by chance the patient may die, and you will not be disappointed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct then this chapter with great care, and when you have pierced your abscess, if it has opened the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a smooth incision, try tending it with linen or wool; and if there are great abscesses, and much pus, it is fitting that you put one tendril in each so they come into contact with each other; and if you have pierced an abscess of the skin part with leather, and sewed it inside, it is fitting that you fill it with old wool or gauze soaked in moisture, and tie it to the flesh on the third day; then the bone, and the bandage of ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if you find blood has come out to your work, then tend it with cool and easy water and salt, and cover it with the same cloth again many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to persevere with bleeding if it persists, observe his government and treatment, and apply the powders I have described in this book into your hands. If it is now winter time, and the poultices are applied to the wounds or abscesses and are very hot, then cover them with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil; and if it's summer time, and the poultices are hot, soak wet cloths in water and oil, or wine and oil heated, once a day, as we have said; and after removing the poultice and cleaning it, treat him, as is fitting, until he is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is the case where one must carefully examine the treatment of abscesses: for we have said how to apply before treating an abscess, and that is in the chapter.
des soros	he heals with fire command to the sick person that he lets the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the pus of head wounds come out small abscesses, and there are those things similar to cloth, as is the wick of a cat's skin, and there are many such appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are fats and swellings such as pus, and similar as wet like skin; and there are swells that are hard and stony to cut, and none have doubt when the arteries do not give any bad consequences.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the arrow wounds of the shoulder are such that if you examine all the instruments called "entromissoire", because the form comes after this, what kind it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they will cut from above the long bone.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is dried out, they will scrape away skin without leaving any area, because it returns to swelling if left untouched; then they submerge cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; otherwise in water and wool, and applying the wound, and letting it rest until the next day; those who are left for the night will be cured.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the cotton is reapplied, as before, on the second day, and the dressing, until you know well that it does not stay at night; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for it, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscesses are swollen without any fat, they will cut according to this form on the long bone; and I wipe away all your ointments, and scrape from every part, and put all my care for traction to treat the wound where it is; and if the arteries make a counteraction, do what I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do thus with an abscess if it is hollow, and when cutting and when curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And he cuts on the abscess if it is hollow and moist, for if it is lighter, because there is less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there are some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and such as I copied or head of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a stone hard, rough and white, which cannot be broken; and if any one has tried to pierce it with iron, we have also done just as well a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come or heads, whatever those which arrive on the head of children and roots of the ears, he opens so much as it is to be done for a long time until it comes out from the bowels; and cures as is needed.
des scrophules	Described by scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	This happens often to abscesses on the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they occur elsewhere or in the body, and are very foul, and often join one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly located in its own chest cavity, just as the abscess and swelling of the head, as we have said; and the symptoms of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malignant and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one, therefore, where you see a good disposition in the armpit, and it is like the color of the body, and mute from every part, and not sour as the milk of the neck or at the artery or in the conduit, and not deep; then it is fitting to copy it over, and to scrape off each part, and they will be the two lips of redness, if you have need, just as we said about abscesses on the head; and take care little by little, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or vein, and do not use too much force or cutting with sharp tools, lest your hand gets wasted, and you see too far ahead, so that you do not copy more than what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	If you prick the vein or artery, and this does not stop bleeding, apply vitriol to the wound or any powder that remains in the blood, and bind the wound; and leave it until the swelling is reduced, and the pain subsides, and begin to clean.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is not infected, it will return to its original state, until you complete it; then seek your doctor's advice if there are no small swellings forming, and cut them off and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	If there is a large vein at the root of the swelling, it is not recommended to cut off that swelling in its root, but tie with a strong double thread and let it fall down without causing harm; then apply the wound dressing made from Egyptian linen cloth, and then treat the patient.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you hit the entire scrofula, it is fitting that you assemble both lips of the wound and sew now, because there will be no remaining fluid from the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if it is fitting that you listen to cover the root of it, and treat with force, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have fluid, let us pierce in or where it opens; and pierce as we said before, depending on the situation, then apply ointment and similar things, if they infect what remains of the infection; and when the wound is well cleansed, so that the treatment of ointments will be effective until the patient is healed.
de squinance	of squanderment
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient people spoke and said about cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land do it, and that is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have fallen into a coma, it is necessary to prevent the opening of the throat that is called "epiglote"; and do not give aid to this because all the veins and the membranes of the patient are at those who have a cut in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the membranes, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary when we want to cut the epiglottis that we cut it below three circles or four, with a small cutting across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cutting through the syphac, not on the cartilage; and thus, if done carefully, it is convenient to section the epiglottis without breaking, and the vessels are long in remaining.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Instruct the masters that if they are afraid, then it is fitting to stretch the skin of the throat all around the neck; and make a cut at the jugular vein until it comes out; and remove the swellings of blood, if you see anything; and then strike the sinus, as we have said; and demonstrate by cutting the section of the jugular vein that has come out from the broken limb, and by the failure of the voice; and let the wound be left open one piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed by which one doubts strangulation, gather together the two lips of the wound at the jugular vein, and remove all the skin to the cartilage; then administer medicines that make a fetus grow until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this (cutting) until the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect in the liver.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Instruct the patient to tie on the throat so that the patient cannot inhale, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and because the ancients command you to leave the wound uncovered until the malady has passed, and it passes away after three days or four days, then they commanded you to sew the wound and cure, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young woman who took out a knife, and she stuck it in her throat, and cut off part of her neck; and I was called to cure her, and I found her also dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had been drawn from it, and I saw well that she had not injured herself nor cut her vein only to the throat, but that the vein came out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I have failed to translate the text.
de la grosse gorge	of the great throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This is called a hernia of the throat, and it is a large lump in the color of ebony, and it occurs mostly in women; and there are two kinds: natural and accidental; for a natural one has no appendix.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental kind is twofold: because one resembles fatty flesh, and the other resembles a lump coming from an artery; there is fear of it, and it should not be treated with hot fire unless for those who are small, and he probes and searches inside the passage: if you find it similar to fatty flesh, and have no suspicion, then strike as we do when cutting meat, and take out all its covering, if any, and thoroughly search, and cure as is necessary, until it becomes perfectly sane.
des nous	from ourselves
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many of us to describe, all their similarities; and it is necessary that I say all the differences between a new birth and an old wound.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an issue is when and fever remains, until the ebullitions are passed, and it has been completed as to putrefaction; then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a new wound, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains the pus, which are its own sacs, according to the color of the body, and begin just like a jelly, and become large; and are so similar, or in size, or moist, and much of color, as I have said in division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of this thing, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form or chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses is that you take or more moist than what you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you see that the instrument has pierced the core, then as long as it follows the size of the abscess; then pull out the entromissoire, and be careful not to cut.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moist corran cuts through whatever color it has, if you cut as I have said of other abscesses; and if after that the instrument does not come with moist, then see if it is fatty, if so then make a cross and take it out with pincers, and lightly scrape off each part, and keep warm where you find it in order to treat the wound with the nose; and if you cannot treat it well, cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it stays there, it will return again and again; and if it stays a little while without troubling you, apply the wound to some corrosive powders, hold the wound tight, put on soothing things like abscesses cold, and treat other treatments until he is cured; and if the wound is great, cut off both ears of the wound, and treat the one who hurts.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is inflamed against this or another thing if you hasten and apply the new vinegar cut, let it remain for two days or three, until the wound has passed, and rests the boiling of the blood; then returns to cover that which is remaining nowhere.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Now here are the forms of the interstitial struma, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb"; and there are three kinds too: great, medium, and small, to encircle the fistula abscesses; and they are also like the needles with which we sew the sutures, and made of citrine, iron, or silver, and are yellow in color, and are more effective for puncturing black abscesses; and there are three kinds too: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of ulcers are of many kinds, just as you see here: large, medium, and small; and some have two heads in three different ways; and some have three heads and are so divided into three ways; and some have two heads, and only one head, and are so divided into three ways; all this is necessary for their treatment.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of these cuts is made sharp, and of such kinds that some are cut only from one side, where the flesh is scorched, so that the vein and nerve are not cut; and these incised ones have the amputated limbs returned to the hand, in such a way that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; they come in three kinds: large, small, and medium, just as you see; and do not use them more frequently than in the chariot joints, namely, legs, arms, nipples, and elbows, and similar limbs; and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling a strip of scar tissue, according to this shape, with which they stain blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it on no occasion at the place which is healthy to have veins cut, and arteries, and never return according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never do the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like breasts of a woman; and they remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them must treat according to this form along this line from a to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scorch the fat, and apply the wound with medicine mixed with charcoal, then assemble the two lips of the wound to the seam, and treat until it is healed; and if the nipple turns towards downwards and becomes inflamed for its size, as in women, if you make two stitches over it, so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, because the greater line contains the smaller according to this form along these lines from a to g; then scorch the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powder, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the corruption of blood, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton cloth in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it produces the remaining and the fat, then cure until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	The evacuation of blood from an abscess
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from beneath the armpits are hard scrofulas or it has scars, and if there is moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. up to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the whole bow of the abscess is empty, apply the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment suitable for that until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofulas, treat them as we have said in incising scrofulas, and if the wound is about a vein, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the artery removal
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut and the skin is sutured above it, if there are many abscesses, and the vein flies out with an abscess; and when you notice this in your fingers, you feel a strangulation; and when it's for the vein, it appears red and swollen; and it's folly to cover up this abscess, and itself when it is below the joints and sinews and at the neck and filled with many other things, and it's very great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to open the iron wound, and he who has a head wound should do so as well, and in one who has an inflamed artery make a cut above the skin for as long as it is possible; then sew around the waist with stitches, and carefully draw out the artery from under the skin; next insert an awl into the vein, and pierce to the other side, and tie the artery with two threads of linen, just like I have taught you in extracting two arteries at the temples; next keep the patient tied by a strap until he stops bleeding; then treat him with bowels that come up, as long as his stitches are dry; and if the abscess is large enough for the vein, it is necessary to tie one part of two fingers around the thread; and if you doubt whether the threads will not slip out, insert another awl under all the skin around the wound, and tie the threads in four linen strings; then cut off the superfluous part until there is nothing more to cut, then cut the superfluent part with a needle and leave what remains tied; next put on a moist cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, and keep him treated with poultices and ointments until he is healed.
des apostemes des ners	In the wounds of those who have suffered from this cautery there are often evacuations of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	So too do abscesses come in the artery and vein, and abscesses appear at the wounds when they are fresh, or due to excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows or at joints where there are bones, because it's an abscess, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and is accompanied by many deaths; and when it is strained, he feels pain, and isn't easy to cover with armor, but worse under the skin, and falls ill from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor above or below, and one who has joints cannot be covered with iron: perhaps they will come from contraction; and those who are on the head or forehead, make a blister at the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if you have tongs, and cut it at its root; and if it is large, if you wait for the swelling, and scorch it, then take out the bone, and assemble the wound to the back, and let the cure continue until he is well.
des grosses boces pendans	of great mouths hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	never happens in the belly and not anywhere else, it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to onions, and has subtle roots and large knots; and there are small and great ones; I saw one man who had 2 bellies that were similar to fungi in shape, but there was no difference, they were white, and had thin roots, and had been split open, and it rots with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I let them cut and found them weighing 18 ounces in one of them, and in the other six ounces, and the wounds from the incision are such that you look to see if the patients are moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root; so they cut with a large spatula, and they do cautery on fire in front of us.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	But when cutting comes often too large bleedings of blood, and they do not warn you, so hurry then to cauterize; and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision with iron, take a good strong thread, and tie the artery as we have said, and let it remain for two days; and then reset it, and do not cease to tighten the thread until the artery is cut, and feel by its sensation; and if the roots are thick, there will be fear to cauterize itself on the belly, but you can well cover half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cauterize the tendon which is of a red color and full of pain and red marks.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	This is an enchantment or spell, and I came to this cure for the chancre after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or a cut on the scab, and is located in the abdomen and there are other boils, as it happens in other cases, such as when veins burst open or arteries rupture according to what is before them, or because of venosity; and if this is due to the cut of the scab and its discharge, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and is a light thing with pain, and opens up through various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it comes from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press on both sides, it returns, and then goes away, and by chance it becomes scarred, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and for strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Et se c'est por moistor, c'est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is fitting to leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	But because of doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter about abscesses, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is of an intestine or spleen, then instruct the patient to tie his girdle tight, and lie down straight, then tie himself tightly around a bundle; then command him to rest between your hands, then go towards the place you have marked off with chalk; then open half of the abscess on top of a large needle; then bind it around with a strong thread or a cord made of thick silk firmly, and make sure the ligature is secure; then uncover half of the abscess above the ligature, and pour your medicinal liquid into it; if you find the intestine caught in the ligature, release it, and pour the intestine away from the belly; and if you find the spleen, cut off the superfluous part; and if the artery or vein is against him, then go calmly, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert them into what you have made pierced; then strain the abscess in four lews above the needles; and if you see, loosen the needles, and leave the patient until he perishes, and cut off the dead flesh by himself; or cut it when it has passed through subtlety and died, then treat the abscess as we have said; and extract the wound or moisture that you find, then cure the patient as it is required, and heal the wound.
dou chancre	A skin sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in division the similarities of a sore, and how to treat it with medicines, and how not to use iron treatment; and we say that a sore spreads to the marrow, and great care must be taken in its cure, and the ancients said that when sores are on the skin or can be scraped off like a sore on the nipple, and in the groin, and similar places, and one must remove all of it at the beginning; but when they become large and old, you should not approach them, for I have never seen anyone cured of this, nor has any person ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the wounded person, when it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile once; then make him healthy if he has shown manifest overfeeding; then fit the patient well to make the wound; then apply your poultices or sores, and the head from all parts, and leave nothing behind in all parts; and let the blood flow out completely, and expect the patient to be sound at your hands or with anything; but if they bleed again at the incision of the artery or vein, you must cauterize until the wound is stained.
de ydropisie	Fever of dropsies.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have discussed in the division of the similarities of dropsy, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is made with medicines, and the one cured by iron: if it is exposed alone; and one should not touch iron in these two similarities: this means tympanites and hydrops, because they are a mortal thing; therefore, when you treat this similarity of dropsy called "exposed" by medicines, and the cure does not work, look at whether the patient is weak, or if he has another illness than dropsy, such as constipation and similar symptoms; do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient with great health, and he has only dropsy alone, and is neither too old nor too young, then thus operate: lift the patient upright over your hands, and the minister presses the belly outwards with the spatumile of thorny wood in the most lowest part of the stomach.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let them cut from both sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Cut with a point and do not pierce so deeply that it may reach the intestine when you insert it; nor should you be able to feel relief. Then check if the dropsy is confined towards the intestines: if it's fitting, cut below the third vein on the right side of the neck; and if it's due to liver disease, cut on the left side of the third vein; and if it's due to inflammation, cut on the right side, but do not make the patient feel better by cutting in a way that the superfluous blood flows to the weak person. Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour out, and leave your hand at the space between the skin and the vein as if you were scraping away to the quantity of an nail or less; then pierce the vein until the bleeding stops, which is like the swelling of the water; and that's the mark of the liquid.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it seems like a knife of silver, and is made from iron or horsehair lightweight, and has a small crack in that part; and on the cost it has three cracks; and two on one side, and one on the other; and they cut the nails so as if they were a feather, and this is the form of the incision which the scribes carve like a feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	On the top of it there is a nail, so when the instruments come to water, now take them out from the instrument; empty it then for the third part, because if you empty more than it should in that hour, by chance he may die from the resolution of his spirit with the arm, or he will drop his fists, or he will approach death; but empty according to the amount of his virtue, and according to what the arrangements of his virtue indicate for the patient's hands; then take the instrument and hold the water, because it is now held by the nail that was above on the syphac, of which I have spoken, so you must pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw a small amount of water from it. Do not do this every day, and be careful not to become foolish until he is freed but with a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt about the patient, and let them drink much water, then apply a poultice of earth or hot ashes, and have them stay for a long time in the sun, and if they get thirsty, give them a drink; and cure with medicines desiccatives until they are healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, just as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without any deformity in the penis, or if there are deformities they are small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If they wish to pierce at once, so that it cannot be pierced on the entire length of the penis very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Instruct the patient to insert the punctured clove into the boil for three days or four nights, and when it wishes to urinate, stop the flow and sew the wound, then do so again after urination, and possibly there will be no discharge, because the urine that comes out is not able to close the wound.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those of whom there is a puncture are small, if it is treated with the clove of garlic, as we have said, because they will swell.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have a puncture in their own vein are troubled, because no one is born with a puncture on the head of the penis, for they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot defecate due to this matter not being able to come down just to the anus, and this is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to lie on his back, let the head of the rod rest in the middle, and strike it as hard as the length of a finger, so that the punctured piece is in the middle, just like he needs; and take care not to cause more bloodshed which often happens, and if there is, then pinch the one who causes the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	of swellings of the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often swellings come in the rod, and it's an ugly appearance; and some are bad and some are not so bad; if you want to prick them at one time with a subtle needle, strike and puncture all of them, then put on cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure with powdered opium until they are healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the inflammation is malignant, of a foul color and smelling, then it is fitting that you apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you cut it, and if the inflammation is within the vein, and has part of it inside the skin and part outside, then it is fitting that you remove the inflammation which is first inside; and when it is sewn up, take out the remaining part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat the whole thing together, if you are not certain that the vein is completely healed, and darkening and corruption come upon it and on what is next; then it is fitting to remove all that which is black and corrupted, and put an ointment of honey and flour made from pomace of grapes and figs, and tie up with bandages until it is cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the hemorrhaging comes, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps in two situations: when there is bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and swollen, it is advisable to insert a stick into the penis and let the patient urinate through it. And when the hair grows back onto the head of the penis which has not been circumcised for any wound or abscess, then it is advisable that you burn it with an instrument like a file, until the laceration is dissolved, and the head of the penis is freed from all parts; and if this is a painful procedure to treat, then it is advisable to burn it with a single spatumile (a small stick) near the top of the penis and beard; afterwards serve well between two, and insert a subtle linen strip soaked in cold water, so that it does not cause further injury.
de la circoncision	About circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the cause of further complications like other wounds; it is permissible when we do this work by our own will, and especially in children, for it is necessary that we perform it the best way and with the least harm to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	They did not say that they cut the circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and doctors who performed circumcisions in the past, with force, and with all sorts of novelties; it was often that the kings feared because they had two tongues, and by chance if those above were killed, the one below remained.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	For the recovery, and there is double pain, and when cleansing the point of the member is not secure; and by the cleansing of the swelling sometimes escapes the iron, and the wound heals, and thus many times as if they needed further cleansing I have desired.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Through the cleansing which is done on all parts of the limb I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut exactly equally above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, the fingers grow equally in all directions except for the skin; but if the thread is tied tightly around the leather; and if the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child think it's being done only to tie the thread around the shaft so much as possible, then make it straight between your hands or below your fingers so that the child does not see anything, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the shaft and blow gently into the wound, and take it up as high as the head of the shaft is; then clean well with water assembled around it; then tie a double thread around him, one above the other, and tie them apart by half an inch; and hold tight for two fingers by the second band to the pouch and to the dock; and cut between the two bonds; and take the head of the shaft up hastily; and let the blood flow little by little, because it's the worst part; and put powder on top and above the powder glue made from a mixture of rose water, oil of roses good and fresh, and confited with olive oil, and leave it on for just one day, and cure him again with another cure until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force at purification is this: the two heads are tied and are cut off, and they are as large as the middle finger equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of purification is when the hairs within burst at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the wound becomes an abscess; and strike equally, and if you cannot hold it to your finger, then take tourniquets, and then strike.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	and if they burst for three days, and the thing below the vein is swollen, you should leave it until the abscesses of the nails are healed, and skin lightly; then strike as you can move, and keep away from the part of the vein, so that it will not harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the shoulder from sudden wounds caused by powder, as we have said to treat powders, and if one strikes at the joint out of measure, and it goes up, so as not to harm; cure then, just as we have said, until he is safe.
dou retenement de l’urine	When retention of urine occurs.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	When retention of urine occurs due to stone, frost, bowel obstruction, char disease, or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not flowing, and you see it is caused by a stone lodged near the neck of the bladder, so that the patient's knees are curved under them; then they should be placed on their buttocks, and extend his stomach from above towards his back, and restrain the patient as much as possible; and thus the necks of the bladder are constricted to force out the stone upward, because the urine is flowing out; and if it does not come, just as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so it would be fitting that you administer extraction for all instruments called "siringue", whose form is this: and it should be an object of fine silver lightweight chain, similar to a bird's feather; and it should have a length of half a palm and half a palm, and be delicate at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, and tie to the chief one poude of laine or of couton, and but the chief dou fil dedens la siringue; and cope la superfluiteit de la lainne and the bute juscau chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre and d’aubin d’uef, and fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, and li arose la vessie and la verge d’oile moiste and d’oile d’olive and d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant juscau la vessie, and the sente li malaides venir juscau la chose vuide, and ceu n’est mie fait according to ceste ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc and poc, and li urine en suit la laine, puis the estrai fuer, and fai corre l’urine; and rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, and soit aligiez li malaides.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or pus comes to the bladder, when putrefaction is assembled, and you see water and medicine dripping, do this with all the instrument called "clepsedre", and it's the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three perforations: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the medicinal liquids are applied so that they can be absorbed well into the urethra, if possible, and poured when necessary; and when you see your medicines dripping into the bladder, put the head of the cup over the moisture, and draw it off at the source; if you draw the moisture off at the source, and then pour the medicine back in strongly; if the moisture enters again, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle catheter used to catheterize the bladder:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Instruct the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division of stones, and the extraction of assembled medicines; and I said the difference between stone embedded with iron nails, or with a splinter, and all signs; and in which stone we must cut with an axe; and in the bladder, and the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones embedded in the bladder often occur in children, and this is a sign that water is bursting out of the bladder like urine from its subtlety; and they burst open, and grieve the patient's penis, and he cuts it many times, and then becomes inflamed; and at most of these accidents, death occurs; and children take less time to recover until they are four years old, and are much more grieved in old men, and are between those who have gone from youthfulness to old age; and the cure is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, so it is fitting first to purify the patient by cupping, in order to draw out all the blood that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	But it is often not worth seeking to cut stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the hands and push down on his feet, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not rise up again once or twice; then have him sit between your fingers, and let his hands be below his knees, so that the bladder is completely emptied downwards; then look at it and touch inside; if you feel a stone in the space, now hasten to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not empty all down into the toucher, (if) apply a small amount of oil from your right index finger to the wound, since the patient is sick or fevered, or if they are young and not accomplished; and pour it into its fundament, and look at the stone; and when you feel it with your right hand, if it adheres to the base of the bladder; then press upon it with your right hand, and pour away where you see cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he must stretch out his right hand to touch the fingers at the top, and with his left hand take hold of the skin under the fingers in the part where the belly button is made; then let him pour the spatalium on it, so that this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And let him make an incision between the fingers and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left nipple; and it should be straight above the stone, and its two edges should meet at or near the foundation, and if necessary, cut through the belly button so that it is wide enough by default, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, neither too large; for chance, the press may hit something on the foundation that causes it to bounce off work; and note whether there is part of the stone or an angle, and margins: if it's cut out easily; and if there is part that is smooth, like a glint, and rounded, from which the issue comes lightly.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those with angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it won't break, it is best to strain the nails that are like a file on top of the head, in order to strain the bone so that it doesn't escape; or you pour liquid substance into the instrument bent at the top; and if you cannot put it in thus, make an opening in the rotten part, and if they don't come out, then strain them with vitriol; and if there are more bones, first pour the largest one down the neck of the bladder, then cut up, then take out, and the smaller ones after if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then make a larger wound and cut.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For these two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes back into him again because of a wound that cannot heal; but force yourself to treat, whether by dressing the wounds or cutting the nails, until you have treated it by pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply the ointment of pitch, dragon's blood, and sanctum balm, and bind it, then put above it a wet cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water to soothe the abscess; afterwards revive the patient on his back, and do not untie the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release it, apply a lot of oil and water to the patient well, then give him an application of diffinicon and basilicon ointment until he is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess comes in the wound and causes corrosion and congealment of blood in the bladder, and is retained by this, which prevents urination in that manner without passing with urine: therefore put dough in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains there, the bladder will corrode and rot; then lift the wound with water and asphodel and silphium, and treat him in all the ways you know, until he is healthy; and it is to be considered that all the remedies you use, should tie together his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on him.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is located near the rod and fixed there, and urine cannot come out; then the doctor of what I said again, that you measure its length many times, will be excused from measuring for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tried it thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron according to this shape and stick three nails into one tile:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie around the rod near the stone, so that it cannot come out through the bladder; then put the iron lightly into the rod until it comes to the stone; and turn the iron in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; when it comes, then press your hand over the part of the stone that is left inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone is broken and swells with urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the bone and the other above, then straighten the rod between the two tendons, then draw out the force, and free the ligament, and cleanse the wound of frozen flesh which is in the injury; and let the cure continue until he is cured.
de la piere des femmes	About women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There is little chance that a stone will be found in women, and if it happens once, the cure is painful, and is prevented by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that you cannot find any woman who knows how to show herself naked before mirrors, especially when she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If it happens that she finds (it), so it is fitting to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder up to the knee, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike above the stone in the root of the thigh against the midpoint of the bone, where it is moist and matted, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your fingers over the stone or below it, and let the first little piece remain; then pour in the hot liquid into the bone, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as far as the bone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small ones and big ones and rough ones and smooth ones, long ones and round ones, and those with cracks.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, and the he takes it to the land of vinegar, and he holds him for an hour until he is stained; then returns to his work, until the pain subsides, and has bandages that I have told you about in the extraction of stones for your help in your work; and if he does not vibrate, and this is from the artery that was cut, he puts powder on the land and the stain of tenters and bendles, and should not start again, and leaves the stone and does not treat it more, lest by chance the patient dies; then cures the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the wound is appeased, and the swelling subsides, then returns to his work, until the pain subsides.
de hernie carnouse	of a hairy navel
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rice water is nothing but the assembly of moisture or white scab, which is underneath the curd, that contains the blood; and it's called "scab", and there is no other cause for it; and it's the skin of the curd between the white scab that we have said about; and this happens unless it was a different wound.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this rice water is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads out that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it's color fading to yellowish, or it's without red, or black, or white, and it happens more; and these are the signs to know that there is this assembly, because if it is like the scab we have said, then it is the abscesses returning, for a long time since like the figure of an ear, and it does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	If there is moisture in the own wool, then it is understood that the abscesses return with part of the flesh; and because of this one thinks it is another wound; and if the moisture is between the skin of the groin and the white flesh, it feels numb; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, take a survey of all the surrounding area, for that's where the form was previously.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Then judge what is inside according to what comes after the surrounding area.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cut with iron, it is fitting that the patient be judged according to one's strength and the replenishment of their body; then make the sign above on their back, on a high place, and put down much wool upon them; then sit on their left side, and command the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two costal bones near the groin; then take the spongy stick (spatula) and cut the skin of the groin from long to short, until you reach the flesh close to the white bone; and scrape it gently according to the strength of the pain; then pierce the white bone straight through with a sharp point, and extract all the blood, and then put on wool, and stretch the white bone upward; and do not touch the skin of the groin, but only the white bone; cut it thoroughly in pieces at once, so that if you do not cut it well, he will return to bleeding; and if the flesh is torn apart in your hand, fix it in its place when you have completed the operation on the white bone; then assemble the two breast bones near the groin into one costure, and treat as other wounds until they are sane.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you find the corrupted vein infected with another disease, it is appropriate to tie off the vessels that are superimposed on it, in doubt about the progress of the blood; then strike the vein at all the superimposed vessel, and draw out the vein, and cure as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If an injury is assembled into two parts in a similar way, that is to say, you have seen it is made of two branches; then strike the other part as you have done with the first equally, and suck out the blood, and put on the wound a soft linen moistened in rose oil; and put over another soft linen moistened in wine and oil, and put on both veins, and cover it with double draperies, and tie it up above all according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take the draperies, and sew them with woolen batting according to this resemblance and assemble them by stitching in the neck of the braies, and one of the knots is placed on the foundation just above the back, and the others on the part of the nail; and the other two are placed above the two arteries, and so all assembled the restraint is tied around the noose of the braie; and it has been medicated with cautery in place of iron binding, as when you take a subtle cauterizing instrument, and strike the skin of the veins, so that the white substance contained in the blood is uncovered; if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the syphac with nails, and burn it with this subtle cautery hot:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	Instruct the patient to do everything as you wish them; until you are certain all is well; and be careful that the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is more safe; and keep watch for the stopping of blood, and beware of the injuries from cutting; and if nothing opposes you or an abscess or a stoppage of blood or any other thing, then cure what opposes you, according to what has been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is fearful and will not wait for this operation because of its horror, perforate them as I have told you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have said that urine comes out, then put the patient on a high bed; pierce the abscess at the place below until the whole purulent mass is released; and make a large opening so that all the pus can flow out; then apply cotton to the wound, tie it up, and let the rest of the pus drain off; then cure them until the wound is healed; and if the scabbing does not allow the pus to come out from the mouth of the wound, then you should put a pen or the instrument used for treating urinary issues, in the shape as before; and expand the wound further, and know that the pus returns and comes together after six months or so, and when it comes together just like before, and thus will pass the patient's days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Out of the abscesses of the throat
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	It is clear that in the cutting of this branch there are many deaths and fatalities, so it seems to me that one should not cut; and I will tell you about the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from the body and especially from wounds, and this is for many reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is that is due to superfluous acidity and water, which spreads into the abscesses or by percussion; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no pain, but an abscess with a wound; and sometimes it is a heavy and painful abscess, and a swollen one, and of a foul color, and not often comes from another source than an artery, or swelling in the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is through some artery, so it is recognized by the disposition of the abscess in the hot place, when you press on both sides with your fingers; and it is not advisable that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made from the inflamed vein is recognized by its disposition at the point of touch with the fingers, and can easily be cut on this shape, and on other marks; and it is that you strike the pulse in the neck, then keep the ear above, and pull downwards to white skin, and deliver the suspension from all parts of the ear.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the ear is already swollen with these marks, then it is advisable to treat the ear and strike it; and if there are arrows in the cartilage, or inside the vessels, it is advisable to deliver all that space, and strike it round.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is at your back side, it is fitting that you copy it all over and extract the phlegm, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are finished, apply the wound of soft linen moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the teeth.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess that has broken out wrapped in a membrane similar to the bone marrow, with the softening of the teeth, and the patient experiences great pain when it heals; and the treatment for this disease is as bad as we have previously said, and as we will tell you, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	Instruct the patient to sit upright on the elevated bed, then take the suspender cord over his shoulders down to his elbows, and stretch out all the surrounding vessels, and the nerves, and expand them; then cut at the spot where the vessel traverses the bone, until it is visible, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples; then put a needle or double thread on the first level where the vein has come out, and tie it to the other cheek, and cut straight ahead, according to the length of the body, and take away the corrupting moistures; then cure the wound as we do for broken bones, so that none of the vessels come out, if one of them is found; because this does not bring harm, and when all the vessels are tied, they do not lose their nourishment, and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the surgical cut of the face
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The symptoms of this branch are caused by sectioning or cutting the face, or by stretching on the belly in the area of the entrails, because the intestines descend from that incision to one of the joints; and these two kinds of causes come from: percussion, impact, burns, or lifting of a pain, and similar things; and the signs when there is an extension of the cut on the face are such that they occur little by little, over a long time, and do not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equalized up to the bone, because the incision presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section on the face, which brings sudden pain at the beginning; and the abscesses appear in various appearances, under the skin, near the intestine and outside the bone of the face.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes they cut with the bowels, and it is retained in the groin, causing great pain to suffer from the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, because it is avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way of treating wounds is that you instruct the patient to tie a fold of intestine into his hand inside the wound, if it can be returned; then sovize above his neck between your hands, and lift the knees; then make the incision on top, and cut through all the skin around the joint long enough; then pour in the intestines according to what you need to open the wound, and so that they can come out; then scrape off the yellow stuff that is below the skin of the joints, until only white scar tissue remains visible from every part; then pour your two fingers into the space between the skin which is over the joint, between the white scar tissue which is under the skin of the shoulder, and between the second scar tissue, and in front of the joint, and in the space behind the joint, and between the second scar tissue; and move it back to the right hand inside the incision on the joints, and lift up the joint above your left hand, and extend the joint above, and release what is tied behind the band; and if you find that there is no intestine attached or white scar tissue, then pour it into the abdomen below; then take an awl with a 1-inch cord made of X threads, and pour it in at the back of the scab, which is after the skin of the joints; after the abdomen, then cut off the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are 4 threads left; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the scab with a strong cord of 2 parts; then evacuate the hairs from the threads, and bind them firmly for 2 parts, so that no servants who suckle you can enter into you, that there is no opening or passage; and put the cord in place according to the first cord long 2 times of that one, and after those 2 cords leave off the scab which is under the joint the length of a double cord; and then do all the rest according to the curvature of the joint; then cut through the skin below the joint as we have said before; then anoint laine with oil, and apply to the wounds, and put on the binding that we have told.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes cauterize the white flesh so that we have said, after incising, by doubt of decomposition of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and let the bandage stay on it until it falls off by itself; and if it delays at night, either rises from hot water, and puts on what we have said, until it falls off; then treat the wound with another cure, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of caruncle or varicose hernia.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this section I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done in this way: like the raspberries that are assembled on the skin, in such a manner that you tie the straps, after cutting above, lightly below; then cut into the flesh, and cure the abscess that occurs, until the strap chafes; and cure so as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you strike the hair, if it muffles and cures the wound, so that it is sound.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The suture is tied, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cautery is more moist in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the joints.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	It happens often that the skin of the joints is softened in some people, because the flesh inside is softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary, when you want to cure him, to make the patient lie on his back, and strike the soft skin above the natural skin; then tie the two lips together with a bandage, and if you see, cut through the first three layers of softened skin or four firmly; then strike between the layers, and the cure is like other wounds, until he is healed, and the stitches come out.
dou chastrement	Let the cautery of fire command to the sick person that they let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold your eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that cauterys are forbidden in our law, and for this reason I do not want to speak of them in this book; and it is necessary only two ways: one, so that those who know about cautery may respond when they are asked, and tell the cure; and the other, because we have often had need of cautery from certain animals to help us, as from oxen and sheep and goats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that cauterys are done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that way which we do by attraction, we make the person sit best in hot water, until their flesh are softened and relaxed; then prick with your hand, until they feel no more.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: it is fitting that you tie the bestiary, and press the skin of the joints to your left hand, then suspend the suspension rope, and strike each joint once, when you have well scraped them; and let any little scratch on the skin and the subtle scratch which is on the harnesses; and this method of chastrement is more gentle than that which is done by attraction, because attraction may perhaps leave some thing from the joints, due to which the bestiary desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of those who are hermaphroditic.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	An hermaphrodite is according to two kinds of homes: one is that between the two sexes opens like the figure of a woman's nature, or he has hair, and sometimes no urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And other women are also thus, and they have a point on the nipple, just like a stick.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cures for indigestion and hunger are thus: you must tie up the stomach all the time, just like other wounds; in this second manner, men who have urine bursting from their penis due to infection, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	The tentigene is tied up on the natural part, until it becomes too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as their hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to dye the superfluality of the testicles on your hand or near the nails, and tie it lightly; and do not go too far, lest blood comes from it, then you must apply another cure until it is healed; and there is another char where a boil appears at the mouth of the vagina, and the vulva, and by chance bursts forth, and is like an egg, and for this they call it "the cow's disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to copy it, just as we have said, and the treatment until it is healthy.
de erratique	Of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	In error, for when the nature of woman is not perceived, or the defect is felt; and it is natural by birth, or an accident due to illness that came upon her, or it's caused by a chariot accident, or by a sharp stab or piercing, and it occurs in the womb, or on the breast, or elsewhere, or whatever way; for it fails conception, childbirth, and by chance the flowers may not have appeared; and knowledge of this is perceived through the swelling of the face.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If there are signs of a rupture near, then choose whether to do it with your two hands or the right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is swollen with pus and it is close to the two pounds, hasten and do thus: put your two fingers together, and the woman lies on her back, spreading her legs; then set the two pounds apart, as long as the swelling subsides, and the pus is stopped; then take lard in oil, and put it on the joint, and have the woman apply to every part each day, so that it will not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swelling is hard and dense, it is best to make a wound like leaves of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stopped blood is of charcoal, if you apply to the spot and wound, and have the medicinal juices, like aloe, dragon's blood, incense, and many others, then put a large linen bandage around it, so that the wound cannot heal; and do this for a long time, and apply a linen tent dry; and be cured with other cures until you are healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the groin comes a wound or sore, so they must cover it according to this manner; unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is in the groin does not need to be touched with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which are not usually cut, and when old hemorrhoids occur they become swellings; and we have said in the section on ulcers the similarities to abscesses, and I will tell you here those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and swellings when they are swollen in the groin and do not appear to the sense of touch, unless it is treated with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who have at the corner of the mouth, you can feel, are those that you can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then sit her at the altar with tongs, and cut in her roots, then powder over medicines restraining blood, as it was accustomed and bleeding of dragon and incense, and similar things; then pour her feet into boiling water for an hour, then put her in cold water; and when the bleeding comes, if you do so, make her sit on a decoction of sumac and grape juice and gall and similar things, and then mix with wheat flour and honey and easily, and enfold it on her back to apply;
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it clots, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If this is not so, if they make the patient inhale hot air on the back and on the shoulders with pain; then take a linen cloth, and apply it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of angelica with wine old, and let him breathe.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess heals, then treat the patient with poultice until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so they should cover it as I have said; and then continue to treat him until he is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marrow.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come from the marrow, such as canker and bone abscess, herpes, itching, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I have mentioned in this division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I tell in this treatise the abscess that comes to the marrow of the bone, which is not an abscess that only cools bowels; and if you see well how the fire cautery works, look carefully whether the abscesses are present at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red then you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let the patient rest until the pain is alleviated; and then put him on a seat, with two petis sieges or he can recline, and support his back and assemble his feet towards the leg; and make his knees spread out, and place his arms under his girdle, and tie them well with a good ligature; then take the bale (of cauterization) to the right side of the face, and apply it afterwards to the form that comes after this; and it is necessary that when you see apply this instrument, that you pierce first in place by depth so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapery, so that the instruments do not grieve him; and it is necessary to put the cone of the instrument on top, and to tie the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	If the wound is covered with linen, then it is wise to avoid applying hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The skill is first in the birth that she knows the natural figure of birth, and the signs are when you see the woman press herself to expel, and desire to bring forth the afterbirth: then hastens the child to come forth quickly; for it seems that those children born naturally are according to their own figure, and are out from under their head, and with them is the second part; and when you see these signs, it is wise to press lightly on her belly, so that the child comes out soon; for when he pushes upwards from his head, then is the second part with him, and cleanses the linen of its superfluities by good cleansing; and this that comes about other ways does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it happens sometimes in his feet, and the flesh or the joints, and the hands, where he comes upon his belly, or sovin, and is transformed by chance to the neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the healer to be cautious and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the fever comes upon his head due to natural cause, and a pregnant woman cries out, and the virtues of her flesh are weak, then you must put her on a stool, or have women hold her; and if the matter is cooked in oil or fenugreek, and then pour the balm between her two nipples with the small spatula which is this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the sinew, and strike at one of her joints until the moistures that are in the fire come out; and take away the belly of the woman as long as the fever descends; and if it does not descend, you should cover the woman with musk and fenugreek with olive oil; then let her drink and vomit with condities, and keep her mouth and nostrils closed for an hour: if this is done now, she will be cured.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out, so it is fitting to gently pull them apart little by little; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on the bed, lift her feet up high; then draw the bed onto the earth, and let the woman, so she does not strike with the falling down; and if the hands cannot enter and the child dies, cut the hands with the knife that is placed before it, and extract the child, and pull them apart gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the issue of the child's feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto its feet, so it is fitting to push it upwards; and then turn it a little by a little, until it is even; then take hold of the feet and stretch them out a little by a little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can he jump just as quickly, if he pricks himself with a needle, and the blood flows out from his body; if he falls, may God be with him.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he is unable to do so as we have said, if the pain increases little by little, until it is according to his natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he will be lightened.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come about as we have said, then take musk and aloes, and olive oil, and gum arabic, and grind everything in mortar; and put on the natural woman's substance inside and apply this ointment, then let him sit in cold water until below the ribs; and when he is softened down, let him tie a linen band around, and put it on, and let him lie still for an hour; then let him sit on the seat, then let him vomit and tie his mouth and nose, and let him take to his belly lightly, because he now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, so it puts on its balance when its hands are little by little; then it leans on its shoulder and hangs its feet below, and sits gently on I lit; and bends its knees a little by little, and then it grips with its hands upon the air, and opens the cussins beneath, until she is dressed down below; and if the child does not leap, so take its feet and bend them together, then lift up the belly, then pour in your hands; and let the child come a little by little; and instruct the woman to dress herself while the child is still inside.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child which comes with a limb extended
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is fitting to endeavor to return the limb: if it cannot be returned, if you raise the woman and go; if she cannot go, then make her sit on I lit, and bend the knees; then bring in the musciline as I have described; and if she does not conceive, then make her sit on the stool, then study to return the limb; and let the child come according to its natural figure, and make her prepared, and instruct her to dress herself until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of a child after its birth on the neck, and has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its back its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is certain that the child twists its hand, then turns it a little and little, and makes it lighter; and when it has become even, if you put some muslin cloth on it and oil, as we have said, then he commands her to make it move a little by little; and when you have done this, sit her down in the seat, and she must bind herself.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner to all the rest
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When he comes to this manner to all the rest, strike the vein at your elbow, until the moisture is clear; and if his face and neck swell, strike from the nose, so that it does not congeal, and die the child; then pour him into a vessel, as far as you have put him in, as much as is fitting, and command the woman to bind herself at all times: then he becomes lighter.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issue of twins.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	They are said to be born many times, and sometimes they are born with three or four fingers; and this is not a strange thing, and it rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things and do not live if they are named; I know that they are multiplied and are cut off by the same factor that devises them, which is linked to the bowel; and sometimes they come out naturally like all of us have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out severely, then the cure is as we have said, and it's done with subtle bile, and it heals quickly and lightly what she does; and it is just like what is found in good medicine for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the marrow of the femur I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than fifteen times, and all forms take on the shape of a child according to the measurement of its glorious size, for it is possible that some similar thing has occurred; therefore, do as this seems fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I said in division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by work of hands; if this seems fitting that you know whether the woman is of good virtue, and has no accident, or has fear of death; if this seems fitting that the woman be sure on her back, and her joints inclined inward, and her legs raised; and the minister gives two parts of oil to the marrow with muskillaige of altee and fenugrec and seed of flax, then rub the jaw of the marrow with these oils and muscillaiges, then inject into the marrow lightly, then take one at a time or whatever seems fitting to you, and be careful if the infant is appeared that it comes forth from its chief; then inject one in his eye or on his chin or in his mouth or on his cheek or near the breasts or under the armpits or beneath the navel or near the ribs so that the thing comes forth by the piez, inject a second and pinch the skin and along the cost; and it seems fitting to give an onion to her hand with her right hand between her two hands of the left hand, and inject into all these places lightly until it is dry; this is the shape of the onion:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Instruct the patient to find another bone where it can be fixed, or if you have to operate on it, so that the extraction is even; and then stretch it evenly in moving from one side to the other, for it to come out, and keep the bones aligned as it does, just like this:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it remains in part, pourge with some of its two parts of fat, and put them into that part, and treat the other part; and if it does not remain in place, move this bone or higher to you, and do thus until it comes out all fiery.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be reduced by straining, so that you wrap up its drapery, until it comes out all; then cut in the joint of the foot or at the cost, and do thus with the other hand, and on the two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is upon its feet, so that there is a slight attraction to it, and the address to the opening of the marrow at the mouth of the femur is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is strained in the belly or in the groin, so that you bring forth what has been hidden above the navel on the arm; and make the belly or the groin, until the moisture that resides there; and if another member is dislocated, and the head (of the femur) remains stuck, then fill the gap with water and oil, and let it flow; and if the marrow of the marrow is closed by a sharp clot which has come in, it is not necessary to further trouble it, but rather to offer soft and moist things; and these are suitable for eating after the passage of time, and slice them in milk that soothes and calms.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its chest and you can put it even, follow what we have said in the living infant; and if you do not have power, place the wound by pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, follow what we have said about the apothecary's measures that come out from the marrow; and if bleeding comes again, then tie it up in water and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with child, and the child had died, then she consulted another besides it, and the other died as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came an abscess in the tooth, and it swelled so much that it burst, and great pain began.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the doctor, and I thought it would take so long, and could not wait for the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and from it an bone came out, and after some other days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised much, because that belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I sought the wound, and with my hands I found bones, until the woman was in better shape; and she had lain there for long time like that, and finally it began to show a bit of bone on her left. And I have never written this chapter except because when the master physician encounters an unusual thing, he knows how to give aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Letting the marrows return to their place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of pressure, where one presses the books; and then again to the two joints of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	In any case, the horn is more subtle in its restraint, and is made of ebony or boxwood; and it has a mouth that is two fingers' breadth wide, and the margin of the tree should be one finger's breadth, and an arm's length long; and for both joints of this same horn, they are two adjacencies of this same fist, which are firm in one and in the other, half a palm or a little more; and these two adjacencies are sealed in the mouth of the marrow to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, similar in subtlety and lightness, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the nails; and it has two joints, with two adjacencies, just as you see, one palm's length, and two fingers' breadth; when you open the marrow with all the instrument, place the woman on a stool over her belly, and bend your knees, and overlie your feet; then seal both adjacencies together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument between its joints; then operate your hand over the entire instrument, just as you have done with the nails equally, according to the amount that opens the mouth of the marrow, until they cause it what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all above, and it is multiplied in its likeness; and when the wounds are prepared with mirrors, then it is more hastening to do the work, and higher to the heights for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not prepare the instrument that you use it, because their necessity is no excuse.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second tooth is retained in childhood, it is fitting that you command the patient to keep their lower lip and gums tight, and then make them spit out with condensing powder, and tie your hands tightly around the mouth and nose; and if she swallows this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not happen, then the procedure is performed, and make a perforation or a cavity, and put herbs which can open the mouth of the mare, such as camphor, anise, chamomile, saffron, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water on fire; then put a candle or a perforated pot in the mouth of the mare, and tie the other cheek inside the mouth, and let it remain until the vapors come out from within the mare's mouth; then make her spit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If he takes the secondine ( likely a reference to an instrument used for cautery) immediately.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment and is not better, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand with olive oil or with musk or alum, then soak it in water, and later bring back the secondine; and when she finds it, grasp it gently and straighten it little by little, so that the stitches do not cut during the extraction; but they should move lightly from right to left, and then treat her again; if she comes and loses her hand.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the stitches on her mouth are still tight, we have prescribed to unclog and to fumigate with herbs; and if she is not better from what we said, be cautious so that you do not err in treatment; but it is likely that what is tied around the mouth of the stitching will be bound to a woman's cistern, then wrapped with ointment tetraformula; put on the poultice and restore her; but however, when she puts it on herself, if there comes a foul odor to the stomach and head, and troubles the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	It is therefore necessary to perform fumigations convenient for this: none of the ancients has proved that fumigation with cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which to fumigate the woman at the retention of flowers and second skin if this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And is to look like a knife, and put the head subtle in the nature, and the hairs wide on the fire; and so be the fumigation on the coals, and the lice until they are consumed, and begin again another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	But infants are born who have no pierced foundation at all, unless a subtle syphilitic has infected one: therefore it is necessary to pierce the lump in the baile where he has infected him, and not pierce too deeply with a sharp instrument, and loosen the lacing so that she does not touch it; then put on a linen cloth moistened in wine and oil, and apply ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, put a bandage on the wound and let it sit for days, and be careful when it comes in to visit.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes there is sudden bleeding from a wound or an abscess; if you want to cover that moment: if it heals, as we have said about the bandage on the wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	of a fistula in the fundament.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from beneath the fundament are nodules, and those that come from the fundament without going through either of its parts, or when there is more than one fistula; and when that nodule is old, it festers, and covered with moist pus or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas burst; and they occur because of egestion or flatulence when the patient makes egestion, and by chance some pieces break off.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If there are fistulas that open just above the bladder and just above the penis; and they reach just above the joint of the thigh, and not beyond the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus you find the fistula running to the fundament, and not going any further: and it is that you put your thumb on the foundation, and pour an arrow or thin iron into the fistula when there is tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, so you put a subtle plug or the hair of a horse in it, until you feel the plug or the hair on your way out; and if you don't feel anything, and they do not come out through peristaltic movement or windiness, as we have said: see that she does not pierce. If you hasten to the cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced just above the bladder or just above the urethra, so that it bursts and cannot be closed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived just above the joint of the thigh, so that blood comes from there; if there are no knots or signs of pain near it, then it hurts and does not heal by medicine or application of ointment; and in these piercing fistulas, there is no cure except labor and folly of foolish physicians who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In those who are not piercing and are not old, there is hope for health by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient should lie between your hands on his back; lift up his legs to the knees, and bend his knees towards his belly; then pour a poultice of earth or plasters if it has knots, until you know where the poultice comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the bone, then it is advisable to put your two fingers on that spot, if you feel that the pain tries to pierce inside; and whether it is discovered or you feel a seafic or char between your thumb and finger, then know that she is pure; but do not try any more, lest you cannot cure her.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is commonly known that some can be cured with treatments, but this happens rarely, and the help we make for them, if it is done as instructed earlier; and if the cautery is heated subtly according to the size of the fistula, so that it comes out from the bottom; and do this twice or three times, until you know which characters must be burned, which are similar to a bird's feather; and then put on moist poultices with butter, until those characters burn, and then apply ointment to bind and stitch.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is so damaged, this is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is so damaged, nothing else can be done to heal it; and if he tries between them and doesn't pierce exactly where the foundation is, and there's a thick covering of charcoal or pitch between his two toes and the tent, and you see the fistula at that spot with a covering of redness; then cut away from the beginning of the fistula, and let blood flow afterwards until it reaches the top of the tent; and he will be freed from the pain and the inflammation; then take out those charcoal-like things that resemble an owl's feather, and don't leave anything.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if he doesn't bleed from it, and cuts between you and the wound, if the fire cautery or astringent medicine is applied.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery there are two things to consider: that is to say, the burning of these charred joints and the stretching of the vein and the drying out of moisture; then the treatment of wet wounds in butter or in broken places, until the joint bleeds, and the veins are heated up; then cure the wound of the quick limbs, which are touched by hot iron, and are burned with it, such as those who are charred on the bowels, and are the medicines that dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	But when it is restored again, it is safe and does not come back.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess comes to a complete stop at the bottom of its foundation, and is distant from the body, pour two or three of wine into its foundation, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tendons, and there are two of them that are torn or charred, or it is close to piercing, if only fire was visible by chance and expectation, through the management of one of three methods: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you pierce it from the bottom, or if you can, you apply poultices and cure as first; do not go too far into the depth, lest you cover the seat that holds the foundation, and bring out the extractions by chance; then cure, as we have said; by luck, it may become healed, or the covering will be removed from the wound when it is pierced at the bottom, or with a poultice, or with some other instrument pointed; then examine this faulty char that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula away from the opposite part of the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way; and when you put a tent in the fistula, if it is open at the foundation of the skin above, take a tent that reaches up to the head according to this shape:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I tie a knot in the first part and tie the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is perforated in the margin of the foundation within, then pull out the thread from that part, so that you tie your knot or on the foundation; and pull up the head from the thread, and assemble the two joints together, and fasten one to the other, and leave them for one day or two; and restrain it no more, until the threads are cut these characters that are between two, and close; then cure the wound until it is sewn and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula or abscess is not punctured, then pierce it in all manners that you can, unless it is too close to the bone.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not advisable to tie it shut if it is too close to the bone, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spine which we cut when making a fistula is very angular and sharp, one part being long and narrow, and the other short and broad; and on this account it must not be cut too deeply, unless as you see.
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the fundament like a grain of resin, and there may be small or large ones, and in wounds they may have one or several, and it is to avoid the fundament and the head of the fundament; but those that are not are scarce moist, and stuck together by a little water citrine or a little blood clot, and have the color of flesh.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is fitting that you fasten the seam in this manner: take a thread, and put it through one hole, and then take up the thread above and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn the two joints of the thread below the needle, and if it be thin; and tighten the thread, then loosen the thread, and extract the needle, and do thus to all the others, and let one remain for sealing the superfluity of the wound; then place upon the foundation a moist cloth in rose oil or in ceruse, and place upon the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and then leave him until he heals, and when he is healed, if his pain and other remedies are not sufficient, take out the thread.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	until the flesh or foundation.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times happens suddenly of blood in the intestines, and by the constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is appropriate to reset at the point of a spatula or on one’s nail the scab over, which does not allow it to dry; then treat as long as he is sound so as it may be; and if he cannot get well, restart the scraping stronger than before, until he heals completely and the skin is cleared, then treat him so that he becomes healed.
dou fremit	do not shake
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A small worm is a false appearance before the body, and goes in further; and sometimes it freezes the true path, and you feel it just like death of shaking, and comes throughout the body, and more so in the hands than in other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Instruct the cure to take a reed of an eel's feather, or a strong raven's feather, and place that reed on the swelling, until the purple circles appear all around; then turn your hand over the entire reed so you cut through it entirely, and put the reed into its root, and sharpen the swelling at its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a reed of thorn or iron according to that form, and be subtle under and above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, lest you make a mark that will be seen twice, and press; And if you see, cauterize the swelling, just as it is before or after the cautery of the fire.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a syringe or castor oil bottle.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	None of these things are done with silver or an iron rod, or melted tin or cloth; and sometimes one does these small and large instruments, according to what they have brought.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These are then used in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small or large syringe is used when they are closed and bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if there is a rupture or the belly is bound, as you see, and the syringe is inside perceived; and if it has one opening on one side, and on the other one; and if the belly or the womb receives the medicines from a cow's bladder or parchment, and they are perceived all around with small openings, and there are one inch of space between each opening, then you must put in an inch of space, then pour into these openings strong thread, cut in the shape of X or inside, and assemble the belly like a donkey; and when the medicine is inside, if it sticks to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then syringe. And this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And so let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or bearberry wax, or a similar thing, then give it to drink lightly; then press the ministers' hands together on his two limbs, until he is all well, then remove the blister, and lift up the patient's legs, so that if the medicine comes out, so too will the boil, and if he sleeps through the night completely, then there will be more aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you blisterize him in an illness of descending wind, and the medicine comes out quickly, then he will start bleeding again until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there are hemorrhoids on the fundament or abscess, so that the blister is as subtle as when an infant, then it's the form of the fine blister where the skin is strained:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	For we have already said in the treatment of wounds; or you will tell us about the treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they were made of, and according to the place or where wounds are made, and because of which they were made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Things because wounds are made of are caused by a stone being struck, and the cutting from a sword or knife, or lance or club, or sieve, or similar things; or what is made according to the parts of the body, if a wound was shot onto the neck, or head, or ear, or belly, or liver, or like a limb; and I will tell you about each wound, and begin with simple wounds on the head, because the memory will come back in his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I am warning you when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, so be cautious if it's a stone or similar thing, and the skin is completely torn apart and the wound is very large, and you doubt slightly whether there is an abscess: then do it immediately to heal the cephalic itself if it's come from bleeding of the wound, and let them be healed in the opposite direction of the naval part; and avoid the malady being replete with wine and heavy food.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not heal, if so that its meat is weakened, and does not drink wine, nor eats no flesh; and puts on the wound, if an abscess comes up, put cotton soaked in oil rose only, or in vinegar tostic; and if there is no heat, put on the wound if it is fresh with all its bleeding, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say one more time later, and if the fever has moved it, then put on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a cut from a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be closed by stitches, then they are sewn together, just like I will say of wounds on the belly, from suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and flesh, and it cannot stay in place except by a small piece, if it's stuck; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore a hard surface in its place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat great quantities of food, such as meat, eggs, and bread, just like birds, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or rotting leather in the wound and it's not adhering to the bone, then remove all of it, and drain the pus, then cure the wound; and if there is an artery in the wound without any stop, that cannot be stopped by medicine, so cut the artery, and if you find it loose, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then it is a light cure: and you must apply this powder which soles the wound just as much as the arrow has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take cense a part of it; dragon's blood two parts; calcined vivarium three parts, and finely mixed powder, and apply the wound, and bind it firmly, until it has been dried well and united with all its sanguis; and then tie it well, and let it loose if it does not swell; for one does not withhold medicine until it is healing.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes only calmed vivarium is used, when one does not have either the cense or the blood of the dragon, but the arrow has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the limbs have moved the wound, especially when it was open, do not put on this powder but put on some ointments digested or made of wheat flour with water and honey, until they dissolve; then the healer must treat other healings until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a fracture of bone comes with the wound and it is small, so that I will tell you later on after I explain head fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is at the neck and it is simple, and there is no difference between it and a head fracture, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, then there is only leave to let the cure and not put anything that restrains, for they can be harmed at night and make them retreat; and do not put any thing on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of this is with the brain, which are the highest members; but if you take medicine, such as chalk washed in sweet water and melted with olive oil, and apply it also washed in sweet water, and other stones of lead according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, so tie on gauze bands, then cure until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and he has a head full of blood, so perforate or cut deeper lower; and if the arteries have been shot through, and there is evacuation of blood coming out, then apply cauterization, and ligation, and treatment is needed; and if the spine of the neck has been pierced, or the throat, and the vessels are guarded, because the flesh goes, so tie the cut on the vein of the neck, but touch only the vein not the throat, rather according to its natural figure; and then bind hastily, and let it for some days, then cure with remedies such as I have said until he is healed; and if the wound has made impression in the bone, if there are pieces of bone, so cut them off completely, and that which you cannot get, leave so that the wound can heal and be free from pain, and be freed from evil, if the wound is fresh, so powder on the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is an abscess, then the treatment is as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from arrow or sword wounds
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's a spear or sword wound and the bleeding is profuse, then look at the wound to see if it has stopped flowing: for in this case you must know that the wound is mortal; but if it hasn't stopped bleeding and is fresh all around the wound, first do not put powder on it or bind it with the wound itself that would constrict it more, nor draw out what's inside its depth. Instead go back to the heart, and make a diagnosis of the patient; however, apply soothing ointment and bind it twice a day; if you don't have ointment, put wool in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so that there will be no spasm, nor pain of the heart, nor any other distressing movements from death; and when you see the bones' disposition, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the boils and other treatments, as long as the patient is healthy; and if it cannot be cured or operate, then seek to know that there is an abscess; if the treatment is done as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or a knife cut, and it is simple, near the front, back, or side, then seek treatment for what is in front of it; if it is large, get stitches; and if it is small, apply powder; and if it has pierced the bone and taken out pieces, as it pleases the wound, and takes away the foul humors if they are present; and if they are not present, leave the wound to dry, so that the extractions will be lightened; and for other wounds on other parts of the body, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	A fall from the belly.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	A severe fall into the belly is big and painful; for a great wound that never passes into the intestines or the bands of the intestines because they are obstructed by blood; and the ribs are much more painful, and sometimes it's worse to have small wounds than large ones, because to treat the intestines more carefully, if you don't put them back in their original place; for when the intestine inflates immediately, they feel pain and then return to their proper place, and so it is better to have smaller wounds, for that we must move the intestines to their own place as others do; and I say there are four kinds of injuries into the belly: two common stitches occur in the abdominal stitch, and the stitches of other pains of the body; and all of them are more suitable with the abdominal stitch, and I will tell one of each and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	When the injury is small and there is no disturbance of the intestines, and it is easy to treat, this is one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, treat him in one way: by soaking a sponge or half a cloth in hot water alone, or by cooking in hot water with vinegar and spice, and remove the swelling from the intestines until it subsides; and sometimes do this while the wine restrains, and let it stand still so that he may be able to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling departing, soak the intestine in water or cook a mixture of flour and milk, because by this it is alleviated to let through less; and if it cannot pass through, make a small cut on the instrument with which you strike the hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is to loosen what has tightened, so that none should cut him beyond necessary, lest they cause more harm: these are instruments for breaking open.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines bulge out, so it is reset according to its natural form in its own place, if you have the power, because this is best.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, so you should make the patient lie on his back, with his legs higher than his head; and if it's in the lower part of the belly, then place his head and his belly higher than the lower parts, and as I have said for both large and small wounds, thus is the treatment.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, you make a stitch as it appears to you, then take your hands into a minister who holds the entire suture in his hand, and assemble the lips; and this is the common way of stitching, which means you prick an awl or with more, according to the size of the wound's width; then place two stitches from the chief of the wound two fingers' breadth apart, and insert a strong thread into one; and pierce the two holes of the leather with the two holes in the cloth below, as far as it reaches to pierce that side, and assemble the two holes of the cloth together in four ensambles; then bind the thread from one part of the needle into another; and reassemble the two stitches of the wound at once, and then place two fingers' breadth of space between each stitch, because the fine threads cut through all the flesh, and the too large ones cannot enter well: for this they are suited to be medium-sized.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	The patient's intestines I restored, since he had been ill for XXIV hours, and the wound was closed after XV days, and the treatment, and the patient recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not treat him with medicine, for I was in a place where we could find nothing, nor any medicines; and I placed cotton wool twice daily above the wound, and washed it with water of honey until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and thread from the inside to outside; when you pierce the skin at right angles on both sides until it reaches the surface, then cut or prick the stitch either from above or below where the needle has been inserted, and listen to the sound of this stitch as if you were a tailor sewing clothes, leaving once the surface of one side and pressing down on the other, so that the stitching is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of sewing, which the Galenians call proper, is as follows: they join two parts together in a natural way, and then put one end to the other end, in this manner: prick an awl or a needle close to the joint, and pierce only that joint, and leave both joints alone; then turn the awl and pierce from the opposite side inside, at both joints; then pierce each of both sides from the opposite side inside, on two other joints that are one on the other side; and this is the most gentle manner of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this phrase, and no one testifies to it, that we must sew the belly with two needles, or if there is thread in each; and one needle should be inserted from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew sutures; and note that when a rupture occurs on the belly, the sewing is more grievous than on the other bellies.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The injury of the wound is like that of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, so soon as the arrow has moved, put in an intestine, and cut out the flesh; then put on powder with charcoal, and if the arrow has moved, put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and apply thread, and sew the suture, and apply marich; then cure the wound like other wounds, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, so put them on, as soon as they come out to vomit, cotton wool, and move two times a day, until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	You do not need any other medicine besides in cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound is making community among the main members, it is best to moisten a light linen in hot turpentine oil, or in rose oil, and put it into the armpits, and under the axles; and if it causes pain or rotting in the bowels, and it happens many times, so make a castor oil poultice, and likewise when the rotting comes to the intestine; and pierce through it, and examine that since it is the large intestines, it is easier to cure than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "youth" cannot be healed when it is barren, and this is because of the plant of women that is in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to its natural enemies.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the gallbladder falls from the wound, if you put it back in its place again as with the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned into black, it is best that you tie the one that is black, because there will be no bleeding, for it has women and arteries; then cut what is between the ligature, and hang both of the two knees down from the lower part of the wound until the gallbladder chokes, and the wounds heal.
de la routure dou boueil	of cutting with a burn
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, so it can be restored in some men, because I saw that one man was pierced through his stomach with a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the abdomen, and became inflamed and developed an abscess, and from this came vomiting and diarrhea; I gave him treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease until he was healed, and the intestines calmed down.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the sick had something wrong in his stomach; and he did not have any harm, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that whenever there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this way: take firm threads to big knots, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread overcomes his mouth, put both lips on top, so they choke his mouth; and then beat the head, and this will stick if he cannot untie it, and then tie another thread after that in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, and there is no trouble for the patient, and it can be tied to the intestine with a thin thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the head of that thread of intestine which is much clean, and then tie it to the head of that thread of linen fine twisted, then pour the thread into the needle, and sew it up, and pull it out by the route; and this way of sewing is not hot, only as much as according to the way of hope and expectation; and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestines, there will be no help but subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or whichever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Since any wound or abscess, when it dries up, is called "fistula", and especially when it becomes swollen and has pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	Et fistule is according to the node's verticity faulted and rough, or no pain is felt, and it is also like the feather of a bird; and sometimes it shines clear, and other times it is dense; sometimes little, and other times much; and I have spoken of these wounds in division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no ulcer, it is by fire only for one of the VIIII causes: this means, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or because of its malice; or because of what it has within, hard and on the lips, which does not allow healing; or it has too much bowels; or the liver is corrupted, and the medicine is bad in the cure; or because of the corruption being a kind of pestilence; or because of the property in that region being slow with digestion, and late with health, and fleeing by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicines in division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is fitting that I inform you of the treatment for a fistula, which is made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	There are fistulas in all parts of the body, for some come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the scrotum, or intestines, or bladder, or on some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if they occur at the property of a principal member, and resemble them.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all those fistulas of this kind are a source of disease and suffering, and there is no cure except for labour and ignorance; and if it is any fistula that does not appear in the way I have described, and you have confidence in its treatment, and you see it fail, take a needle or iron splinter, depending on whether the fistula is straight or crooked; and if it's crooked, search with a subtle effort to find its root, because the roots bend through the tortuosity. And if the fistula has lost hands, and you cannot search for it properly by needles, then search using one of the lost hands, because the moisture so easily penetrates from one lost hand than another, and sterilizes it; then find the correct location where it is, and whether it's close to a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, according to what I have told you, and copy accurately following the same procedure. And take out the rotten parts and the corrupted flesh that are inside; and then let the treatment be until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep and straight from the beginning, so as to be able to feel it, then apply moist medicine, such as astringent and purgative, to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the remaining superfluous matter; and then apply ointments to make it healthy again; if it's not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bones are corrupted from the fistula, take it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	For the blood from veins or joints do not let it be drawn out or grievous, as we have said; and if the bone is broken, and there is corruption and blackness, then cut open so that the corruption may be entirely removed, until the thing is healed; and if it is not healed, and remains painful just like before, seek to know what you are doing wrong: if you uncover and ask so that you become at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb; and if it is thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If it is not so, seek that the corruption has gone too far, and you cannot do anything: if there is no other remedy but to rely on nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can take it out with pliers, if there is a convenient instrument for this, and if there are many bones, take them all out, not leaving one; and if moisture makes you contrary, and there is no error or fear, cut and clean, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	Et se tu ne les pouves oster a une heure, si met sur la plaie chose enjaignant pourriture, et laisse tant que les lus soient pourri entor les os, et adonc si auront plus legierement les os;
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	It was a young man about XXX years old, who had pain in his leg from within the body, until the matter came to the leg, and he fled from a large abscess, and did not have any cause to open; but the physicians by their folly opened them so much that they burst with many matters, and turned into fistula, and it came to pass that many of them cried out bowing and covering their chests with sweat; and for two years I saw the boy cured, and there was no sign in the art of hands, until I was summoned, and I came to see his leg and the medicines they used, and what corroded by the wounds had a great impact on the body; and the skin of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I sewed a tent in one of the wounds, and then searched for all the wounds, and found that some came together at every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I me have failed then, and I cut in one of the wounds so that I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupt and rotten, and corruption was coming from inside the bone; I saw what appeared to be the bone corrupted, and I thought there could be no other corruption except for the one I had removed; and I began to restore the wound with medicines without success; and then I tried again, and I discovered the bone as it was before, and I found corruption continuing in the bone, and I took it out, and I thought about soldering the limb; but I couldn't do so much that I cut into a palm of the bone, and twisted it to its full shape, and then restored it with medicines; and he became healthy and soldered quickly, and did not need to try again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often causes harm but if the patient is completely healed and in good health, and there was formed on his own bones a hard cartilage, he turned out to be of good disposition and did not have any inconvenience or contrary effect whatsoever, neither at rest nor when coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, if this happens to him: take a cord, and strain at the head of the bone that opens, and command anyone to stretch it upwards; and put another cord of linen thicker than the first one, and tie it above the cartilage which is removed from the bone, and make sure that you draw the cartilage so that it does not touch the blood; and drive a spike or a table down into the bone to cover up the corrupted cartilage; and wait until you can see and feel the corruption, and wait for another opportunity.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Et se li os est corrumpus, and n'apert mie, and li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, and puis soie des l'une partie a l'autre la corruption, and soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Whether the limbs prickle from within or because of moisture; and when you have treated the wound with medicine, if it does not profit, it is necessary to cover that limb up to its root where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes by death or malice, which is greater, of the member’s defect; and the signs are such that the limbs become black, as if they were burned by fire, and after that, because the corrosion spreads from one part to another, and takes hold of every part of the body; therefore hasten to cover it, and if this is due to a blow from some venomous beasts, like scorpions from the sea and wyrms and such like, which strike at the head of both, then be sure to give no space for coming near by hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Et she comes just to the hand, if they strike at the joint, so that corrosion does not come just before the arm; and if she comes to the arm, if they strike at the cut; and if it passes the cut, it's the death, and there is no other remedy for the amount of its virtue; and thus do as long as corruption comes on the bone: if she comes to the first joint, if they strike after the next joint; and if she comes on the bone, if they strike all the bone; and if she goes up in the knee, if they strike at the joint of the groin; and if she comes above the groin, there is no other engine than to kill the patient dead; and the manner of striking or sewing the member so is that you tie it over and under, and stretch one minister down below, and another minister up above, and you serve the cloth which is between the two linens for a span wide, until the bones are exposed; then strike or sew, and put a linen strip from each part, so that the linen does not touch the healthy side, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, and demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; 
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreinant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sur I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent pour oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the shoulders lie bowed out of digest since many years, he will not recover.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle veins are cut after long time, do not despair of recovery, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who are late to recover from the effects of bitter char in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if the shoulders lie bowed out of digest since many years, you should know that they will not recover; and if they are slow to heal, and are far away, then apply unguent made of dried substances and moist ones with equal virtue, as ointment defined, because there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the lower medicine; take ointment defined, and make it with rose oil and vinegar from old wine in substance; then confine and use it; this same thing makes hardened syrup when ointments defined are not present, or you take mirror and aloes and incense, and grind them, and mix powder on the honey when it is on fire; and then apply a cloth soaked in glue on the shoulder, and at no time does an Aristocrat perform a long treatment, nor use roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour from times and centuries; and use simple or composite remedies: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I said, and use it; and if the patient's cure is prolonged, and cannot be cured by this cure, then know that corruption has reached its utmost point, and causes impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in joints.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the elephant
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A boil is an abscess that arises from the elephant's trunk or hand, or by chance in other parts; and when it becomes inflamed, if no care is taken to prevent it, it comes to be a painful boil, and runs and oozes blood until it reaches the root of the trunk, and sometimes even the entire trunk; and the corrosions come to the bone, causing pain and stench, and the swellings become large and red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the section on cutting, and if no cure is effective, then it is necessary to copy from it. Take away all the remaining swelling from the wound, and after that, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great aid when the bones are healthy, and the joint is sound; and if the joint presses on the cartilage, and begins to pierce it, so that the blood escapes, it is wise to put the weight of the joint below the pierced part, and the bone in the upper position, and strike that cartilage subtly and lightly, and then place the remaining part of the cartilage with medicines hot and corrosive to remove all; then apply ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosive is in the bone, and you strike it, and remove the pus, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it will not heal; and if you see that the wound is corrupting, then strike it in the shape of the joint as has been said, then treat until it heals; and if it is rusty, and swollen, and it causes great pain, it is wise to heal it first; then strike the joint with a sharp spur on cutting through, and be sure that the cut does not go down into the cartilage under the joint, because the patient will feel too much pain; and if there is, put something above that which soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from a sore throat of the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two bones that lie in the palms of some men are always curved, and sometimes they have bones, and never an angle, and sometimes birth occurs at the root of the joint, or no birth occurs in any of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who do not move in both hands, and those who are born at the joint of two fingers may or may not move, the height of one who is curved is lighter, in a manner like this: from his root there comes a large stump.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those born at the root of the joint are afflicted with an illness to cure: if it is in the cover.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one born without in the buttocks, it is fitting to first copy around the curved scar just above the bone, then cut the bone at an appropriate length for that person, and then cure until he is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sound that comes forth with the joining of two things is due to their birth, or by the suddenness of an injury, or by the heat of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you copy the wound, if it must be repaired according to its natural form; then put between two tents or moist cloths soaked in oil rose, so they do not unite; or place between two subtle pieces of cloth, as long as it is united, since it suits.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the sound comes forth on any of its parts with the palm, if you copy that wound as it suits.
des vils	the old
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The old are venous thickened swollen with melancholic flunulence that come in many members of the body; and more often in those who go to feet and who work and carry, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer no purging of gallstones at any time, and then cleanse the blood of the basilic.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment is done in two ways: one is to cut them and treat the black wound; and the other way is to tie up the vein and drain all force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The dressing is done in this way: first raise the leg of a hot water bath very strongly until the flesh is smooth and subtle; then strain the swollen leg of the patient from top to bottom beneath the crotch joint; then cut the vein at one, two, or three fingers' breadth wide, and lift up and drain the black wound with your hand, from head to toe, as long as the venom can bear in the body of the sick person; and then tie it, and command him to eat lean meat, excluding black gall; and continue evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and hurt the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s'il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d'aigue chaude tant qu'elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n'as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is cut and torn and pulled apart together, and it is not straight as we have said, so it must be broken forcefully, but not covered; and pulled as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron that one uses to cut the vein is curved, and not pierced, unless it pierces the vein; and is large in curvature, because if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein.
de la voinne civile	of the free woman
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This free woman is tied up in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and on earth where there is no moisture; and by chance is born elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of the rot that comes from beneath the skin, as serpents come inside the body through and around the flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes a great inflammation in the leg, then change the poultice, and as it begins to force itself out, so does like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the head of the vein opens, it is advisable to wrap around a piece of linen from half an inch on one side and a half an inch on the other, up to two inches, and the nail, and leave the linen wrapped around the leg, and at every turn when it is not in view, if you wrap around the linen again, and the new; and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, but do not cover it near its root, until it has all come out; for if you cut it, it will re-enter into the flesh, and bring forth abscesses and putrefaction or in that place, and bad disease; therefore this thing must be treated gradually just above the head, and leave nothing in the body; and it is sometimes this vein when it is being treated from two palms of length, or ten, and one hour came to me, to whom it came out of ten palms of length, and when you cut it, I drank out the blood or pus, and perforated to the bottom, so that all was released; and there remained no matter inside, and brought remedies for putrefaction once a day, then the cure is like those who have had abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes in this vein of blood one rain falls, and itself when it opens at the joint of the foot, or the foot, and a great deal of pus comes out, and that which is lost falls again; therefore cure it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between the leather and the cartilage
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our country "disease of the bull", because it often involves cattle, and it has small worms that are born between the leather and cartilage, and go all over the body, rising and falling, and cause great pain in every member, until the leather comes out where they are, and burst forth; for they are infested with putrid humors, just as snakes, lice, and maggots or worms enter through the venter; and it is doubted about their malice, because when they move through the body, and ascend to the head, and reach the oil, by chance, they may break in, and destroy the oil; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakiir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and causes them to move from one member to another; and I have seen this myself which I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a sick woman and discovered some swelling on her arm, and I saw that it was growing like a vein on the outer arm; and after a little while, I saw it move as fast as a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything else, like living silver when it cuts through its path elsewhere; the pain left that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later ran all over the body, until she came to the other arm; then she told me that she was turning inside her torso, just as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I am very much amazed at how it moves from member to member, because I have never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	But I have wanted to know very well whether they often move with great pain in the limbs, but I did not see it so when I saw it in a woman; and I thought that's why women have thin bodies, exposed skin, and pale complexions, and because of this their bodily forms appear frail; but those who are plump, with moist flesh and well-nourished veins, do not show it according to this reason.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see treating this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up so as we have said, apply ointment on top and underneath quickly, and then strike against it hard enough until the frail form is pressed into the limb; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it in your eyes, seek out the cure for those who are afflicted with swollen veins, like fetid pills, and sapstone pills, and similar ones.
des saiettes	From the arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are different according to their appearance and according to the limbs or where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are those with great points, small ones, and hooked ones, and soldered ones; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and pieces; and the one that pierces into any member pierces it according to two manners: in the principal member it pierces like a brain, liver, stomach, spleen, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	So that when it pierces into any of these members, and the signs of death appear, as I will tell you afterwards, it is fitting to take out this arrow, because death comes after in many dispositions; and if no such sign appears before, and the arrow does not penetrate completely, then take it out, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow flies and pierces the bone, and swells the fleshy part which is above the brain, is when we have seizures and convulsions and emaciation and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of blood; and by chance it may happen without force from the nostrils, or the ears; and by chance it may touch the speech and voice; and when swollen like pus, and as if burned by charcoal; and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the cure, and extract the arrow when it is not on her.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it is discharged or blood flows out are that it is near the left navel, and feels like it has been pierced in something hard, not empty; and by chance the arrow may be silent like the pus, and comes with cold sweat and cold, and fainting: then see if you sense doubt that death is coming.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never gets a chance to swell without bloody discharge from the wound, and the throat becomes swollen, and the patient's color changes, and they gasp loudly and look for the pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow vomits in the covering of the breast, if it sticks to the small ribs; and it brings forth great pain and great anguish, and they gasp; and all their shoulder limbs move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow vomits in the stomach, by chance, if it brings forth anything indigestible from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow vomits in the belly, and there is no expectation of recovery from the wound, or from removing the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If they shoot an arrow into his bowels, and the urine comes out in a stream and comes to spill, and the patient feels great pain: you must see that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the arms and the chest and the neck and the shoulder and the head and the back and the spine and the fists and the elbows and the groin and the knees and the legs, and the member that resembles them are safe according to more or less conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you has happened to me, so that you may do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me at a house with an arrow lodged in the throat or in the windpipe: I tried it, and pulled from another side under the fatty tissue of the ear, and was cured without difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	Instruct the patient to tie a bandage around a bundle of cloth that is placed in the grease of oil under the paper below, and the bandage was tied back, and one could only reach as far as the point towards the fist, and it was the bandages large enough for an archer's bow to fit through; thus the bow was tied safely behind the ears; the game was safe, and no other mishap occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And tie a bandage around the neck of a Christian, and it was the Arabian bandage around the ears; I tied the beards off, and handled it as delicately as I could so that I would not hurt the Christian, and he remained safe.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I tied a bandage to the abdomen of someone who was exposed to the wind or rain, and he thought he was dying; and after he had passed thirty days without changing his condition, I cut up the bandage and re-tied it, and there was no other bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man with an arrow stuck in his side or back, and the wound is closed over; and the arrow stays inside him, and he does not move according to his natural disposition, nor finds any discomfort in any of his works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man who has a arrow stuck in his face, and the wound is closed over; and he suffers such great pain for so long, and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And there was an arrow stuck in the king's man, who had been shot while he was not yet ten years old, and his leg was partly bent to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded when I was summoned to the cure three days later.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I try to translate the given text line by line into English.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the top of the arrow I put under the liver, stomach, and digestive tract, because the lungs swell up; and appeared the swellings on the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on his hands days before, and solved the wound directly underneath it, and he remained thus for a long time, until he felt the swelling in his chest one day; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put medicine on the wound, which was acid and corrosive, day after day, until it became open, and tried it, and felt that the head of the arrow had dried out in the chest; then I adjusted by opening up the wound with that medicine, so that the swelling of the arrow appeared visibly; and after passing well through the ends for four months, and then bursting the wound because I hammered on the nails too hard, from one side and the other, and could not get out; therefore I did not cease to subtilize and devise ways with instruments, until I took it that day with nicely made nails, according to what its form would come to in the end of this chapter, till I had tried it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wounds were closed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your cure on what I did not say, because the books cannot grasp everything; but wise masters have known little about a great thing, and those things present and faltering, find new work, and nine instruments, when they withdraw foreign things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not enter the members or they are fixed only in two ways: either through the bone or into another part; and if it enters by the side or another way, that is an arrow entering the marrow cavity, and it goes there for the first time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not heal now, let it be left to the point where its pores are opened and it is cleaned up; and so if it is fixed into bone, and it cannot come out, let it be left that way for some days, and move it every day; and thus it heals, and if it does not heal, then perforate into all of that forest, until the pore is enlarged, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if an arrow is fixed into the bone of the head, and is stuck just next to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents I mentioned to the patient: do not treat it yourself, but let it be left until it is even after some days, because if the arrow comes just next to that spot, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone alone, and does not come out immediately, and the patient remains in this state for some days without any further accidents, then try to extract it by pulling.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck very tightly and will not come out for any reason, then apply tartar to the wound, as I have told you; then treat the animal until they are safe.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is reinserted into the body of the animal when you cannot see it, and the arrowhead has all its points; and if you feel it, and the bowstring is not suitable for drawing; and if you cannot pull out the arrow because of the tightness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there are no bone, nerve, or vein in the way, then feel the pain as long as the wound is great; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears with what they hold onto, if you take off the nail that is stuck into II parts of the muscle which you can reach, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; and be subtle so that you do not break the arrow, but instead pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you cannot do it once, if the blood is spilled until the vein enters its opening, then take care, because extracting it is an ordeal.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If those who have the same disease do not get cured when you follow what we said in this chapter; and you guard against the incision of the nerve and the vein, and apply as much care as you can to treat the arrow wound without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to how he was before the arrow got stuck, for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then put him according to what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow comes from another part where it pierces something or the skin is inflamed directly if you see or feel it, then put on that size again, until the shears can take hold, and then pull it out: if now it has come loose.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand around it completely, until it enters the bone, and then widen the bone, then pull.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it will not come out, if you leave it alone again, and then continue the extraction until it comes out; and if an arrow is lodged in the wound, pour out its contents; and if it's full of pus, administer poultice, so that you apply a head instrument with a pointed tip; and then pour, and if the arrow is covered by hair, pour again into the hair of the instrument, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow is touched, if it is deemed necessary to copy all the flesh around where the vein is located, so that you can, then treat the wound as it seems fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	In case of an arrow shot to the belly or intestines, or to the bladder or groin, and it is close to the surface, cover over it, if it is covered; and protect the vein and nerve, and then draw it out, and then sew the wound, when necessary; and the cure until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the clamps used to treat arrow wounds are similar to an eagle's beak, and look like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many sizes: great, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form of the bow that presses the hair is like the feathers of a bird, to press against the tip of the arrow, as it looks like this:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of pliers for pressing and stitching if there is:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins on the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Veins that bring health are XXXI in number, because there is XVI, namely: Two branches after the ears, which are called the "dull herbes"; and two arteries in the two temples appearing; and two veins where two cartilages of the two eyes, which are called "aspirers"; and one vein near the forehead; and one vein on top of the nose; and two jugulars around the neck; and two veins above the lips, which are called "augeherich", and those below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that bring health are five in each arm: One is the cephalic, and it's located on the left side of the shoulder, and they call it "vein of the head" among the common people; and the middle one is called "fast", and it's composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is located on the right side of the chest, and they call it "vein of the belly", and it's above the diaphragm, and that one brings health, which opens clearly in the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The arm vein is the one between the auricular and anular, and it has two blood vessels; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: the first one is below the wing-shaped pouch on the left side of the chest, and the second one is located near the ankle bone on the right side of the body; and the third vein which is called “nasse” is located in the other ankle.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The veins behind the ears help with old cathartics and migraines; and the quality of this vein is as I told you, so that you lift the head of the patient, and rub the cloth on the veins which are rough; then tighten the patient's neck with a rope until the two veins appear behind the ears in two opposite directions: if they do not move, and you feel your pulse under your nail, it is a sign to go further; then take a lancet, and push it through below the vein against the bone; then lift your hand up all along the vein, and strike and cut both the skin and the vein well two times so that you see blood; then strain and tie, until they are healed; and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Instruct the patient that if they have two arteries in the temples, and inflammation of the ancient sode, and obtalmie accustomed, and a lump on the eyes; and the qualities of the sickness are like what I say: and it is that the patients strain their necks, until both veins open completely; and feel pain under their skin, and then pull out; then lift the vein up to the neck index point, and cut with the lancet downward, and lift the vein upward, and strike, as you have done in two other veins, and perform the puncture according to your need; then free the patient, and place the neck on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then close it, and let it heal until she is healed; and what we have said about their piercing and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sickness of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as the sickness of the head with old face diseases, and with emigraine, and with redness; and the qualities are such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and lean it up from your hand, or from another thing, and let the blood come out according to how much you see; then set the patient free, and tie the vein until it is healthy and there is no more bleeding.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	But it is not good if the stitches are too thick; and the healing twisted, because the bone is close by, and perhaps breaks the stitches when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The sick of the two veins that are in the two joints if they are aided with the eyes, and the tendons, and the redness, and the swelling, and the boils, and their qualities of their sickness so is that the patient twists his neck from any link, just as before; then he heals, and it is the healing through a hole, a little long, a little wide, because there is no point of char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the swellings are subtle, by chance they break; then do quick cuts on the wound, as much as you have need, and then bind up tight, and bind well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The sickness of the vein at the neck so is equal to an ague, and a severe fever, and face diseases, which cause inflammation and redness that comes on the face, especially when it is old; and their qualities are such that the patient twists his neck, then twists his neck with your left hand, and takes the thin flame long, and strike it into the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well in this place, and the pain will begin now to come; and do not go too fast, make cuts on the wound as needed, then bind it one night, because it is very soon restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The patient with the second gouty complaint will be aided by the narrowing of the vein, and at the beginning of massage, and with a great many ailments, and empetigine, and corrosion, and herpes, and istiomenes; and the qualities of the complaint are that the patient takes away his neck apart from both sides, as we have said; and when the master is standing over the head of the sick person, and the patient sits on one side, then they heal the vein by a long cut slightly, then pull out the wound temperately, or until it seems best; then do another thing in the other vein, then untie the bandage, and restrain both veins moderately, so that the patient does not choke; and leave him just as he is in the morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the cleansing of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The cleansing of the veins of the liver above so helps to break down in the mouth, and to corrupt the gums, and splits in the lips, and does not heal well.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the cleansing of the veins if is to have the patient sit in front of you, and restrain his neck as I said; then turn the liver, and look at both veins, one being on the right side of the liver and the other on the left, which can be recognized by their color and the small black vessels within them: strike then both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, strike the larger of each one, and do the same for both veins above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the inflammation of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	If the inflammation of the veins is on the tongue, it is helped after the inflammation of the head, and it's through the tightening of the throat, and with diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and if you cut the quality to heal so that the patient feels between your hands in front of the sun, and lift the tongue, and look under each side a vein black: then heal both one and the other, and do not go too deep, because under are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins that are cut according to common healing methods are done in two ways: either by piercing all the inflamed area with a thorny myrtle large, or olivaire subtle like the thickness of nails, and they are called "anesil"; and they are thick and thin according to the size and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame is like a mirror so it is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the vein on the flat cheek of a large amount of bloody pus and that contains a great deal of blood and trouble, and this is the form of the flame olive tree.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtle in point, and is to heal the small veins subtlety, or where there are subtle bloody spots.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The balsam of the basilic, which is one of these veins, greatly helps with diseases in the throat, and on the neck, and on the breast, and in the abdomen; and it is fitting for a master that he heals quickly, and that he warms from the artery under.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If it touches the artery and bleeding comes out, if he must stitch again, as I have said; and should not be pinching the flame, but cut like a slaughterman.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic is not opened manifestly, if he must be extracted, and change another one; or you do not want any rain on it, or you heal in place of it the vein that has come into the arm: it opens manifestly. And cut at the flame like a slaughterman, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the vein of the wound, then so too must you extract the arm, touching the place until you know the pulse; then sign the mark with encaustic, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein at the flame like a slaughterman. And be careful not to cut the artery when you see the vein swollen, for that is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it protruding in the same way as the urine of an infant, and if they are pale and subtle, know that there is no artery: hurry then, put on your doily long, then take off your doily if they are not stained, for this has happened many times; tie up your arm, and leave it so, and do not move the sick one; and be cautious, and do not move them until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If they are not stained, and if they faint, and the medicine is not present to them, cut the artery if it opens, for the head of the retreating part; stain them.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a strip of thistle and puncture it, and take one half and tie it well to the other half tomorrow; if they are not stained, this is good; if not, if you do as we have said, apply the powders that stain blood; for the staining is not harmful for those who are dying from small bleeding due to the little size of the wound, and the power of the tied arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The patient of the vein must be treated in such a way that he is cured from the pain on top and bottom, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic blood, as we have said; and it is necessary to the master that he warms for the nerve below, and if he presses too much into the bone, and cuts the nerve, and it swells and the sickness worsens, and by chance, it cannot be healed; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in anyone at all because of its subtlety, it is necessary to clean the sainement with the instrument again; and take care of the skin as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has veins between the two nerves, so that they are cut to the long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The pain of the cephalic vein is treated so that it is cured from the top and eyes are aided; and it is necessary to heal in the pointed at the flame of olive or at the flame of myrtle, because this is the most saved of all veins, for there is no below the nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Every time, it is advisable to seek the lighter method first, and do not worry if you must try it for the first time, and then start again; and by chance, it may swell in some people before trying it, but it will not hurt.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the cut depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about healing is that healing should not be done for the sake of healing alone, but to preserve health and prevent diseases from coming; and let it be done in one of the three veins: cephalic, radial, or basilic; and should be done at the beginning of prayers on a Friday, and after eating in autumn and winter, when the sign of fullness appears; and should be done on the first day or third day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The sick person who is being treated does not have a fixed hour or time determined for his illness, but rather when the need arises to visit him every day and at all hours and in every season; and it should not be necessary to heal children before the age of 14, nor women carrying after only four months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Do not attempt to heal those who are over 60 years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be healed in some manner, if they wish to purge their intestines with a light purgative, if they have much flatulence retained, so that the veins do not carry out the superfluous pus and cause harm to the principal members; nor does he heal properly who is too fat from eating meat, or who is ill with fever, as long as it is so, or dropsy. And if one wishes to be healed after a bout of colic, vomiting, and intestinal degeneration, and many times lying with a woman, traveling, watching, and working, then subtilize the humors, first without fatness, by foods and drinks and medicines; since they have lost their power; then take a bath, if no other thing is forbidden, to subtilize the sickness, and be healed of the vein in three days after the third day, as we said; and beware that day of work, point, luxury, and similar things; and be gentle and kind, and let the doctor heal higher than anyone else, and rub his arms twice or three times, then tie the ligament at the midpoint, because when it is too tight or loose, he cannot correct it without; and then rub him with oil as hands, until the veins swell and are felt; then moisten the suture with the flame of a little old oil, then put on his own thumb nail on that vein below the elbow when he wishes to heal, so that the vein does not burst or fail to do its duty.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow just like strings to the healer, and such as are filled with windiness, so that when you put on the flame, it retracts again and cannot open the vein, and thus is done for those; and if you cut the vein, then the wound is too narrow, because of this they must be advised by healers in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; but if not, then again take a little from under or above that place, since the veins are inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient fears, then let him rest for one or two days, and do not tie the arm: by chance some abscess may form; neither go into the bath, then re-start the treatment as it pleases; and if the swelling is small, carefully make a cut under it with subtle movement, in case it does not burst so much as you see, for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the swollen limb, do not start again with the dressing, and apply a little bit of oil upon it, for it alleviates the body from pain, and is moistened by the oil; and thus to administer the oil in each wound that you treat, to quench the flow of blood; and this same method is applied and bowels are also treated when one puts it on the limb; so subtlety must be used and spareness, when it becomes too big.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes in, which often happens when it cannot be treated only at those times when the vein is cut open, quickly take action and apply a moist sponge soaked in water and wool a little hot, and hold for an hour; and it is fitting that you do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it remains on the limb after some days without any harm or benefit, then it will not be beneficial; and if you see, apply some aloes or mirror dissolved in vinegar, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times happens an abscess and appearance at the opening of the basilica vein: then put your hand on it, and if you find the bone hard under pressure of the hand, that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put anything on what we have said, for by chance cutting without the artery; but make it dry and cool first to harden the bone, then cure with another cure until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply to each person according to the quantity of their virtue, and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is not black, then let it breathe out until it becomes red; and if you see a big one, let it breathe out until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for him who is robust and strong, and has need of blood extraction, to make a larger wound and wider flaps; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and he will recover more quickly and often, and must be healed by cutting across, not piercing; and this manner of healing is safe from the deterioration of blood and the bruising of nerve, and it is better than having the wounded long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for him who needs the blood to be cut, it is fitting to give moist pain in juice of green grapes; if he is heated, cut twice or four times; and if he has a cold complexion, mix before the wound pain moist in syrup mulled, or in aromatic syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if the palm holds the wound, after a great amount of blood has been lost, it is fitting that he drink broth made from cheese and sweet syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to open the vein on one arm and cure himself again, it is fitting that when he is weakened by great blood loss, he heal little by little, according to the continued quantity of his virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to open the vein on one arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong pulse, will recover in 7 hours after the first bleeding, or within an hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to cure himself on the other side, if he should have to cure himself on the second day or on the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, and fait venir fievre;
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein has been cut away, so let it remain and do not bind it tightly, until the abscess is closed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	If a second wound needs to be treated with the same treatment as before, in the same vein or in another vein.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein on the arm is closed in place of the vein at the head, because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of closing the wound, if it is that the patient pours their hand in hot water, until the swelling is red; then bind loosely, so that the vein appears well, and now close the wound from the inside, neither too large nor too narrow; and apply large poultices, and treat them well near the joint of the hand, and if it does not come out, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the swelling drain into the water until you have enough; and if this is so, do not put the hand back in hot water again, because they put more on in a fever than in an inflammation; and the closure of this vein is more safe than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The sickness of the saved hand is worth all the other diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand, and pour in hot water, until the vein opens, if it can be seen; and if it is opened at an angle, and you copy it to the whole limb, do not harm anything; and do not go too deep, because the nerves are now all dried out from the char, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the wound is not frozen in the flesh, and it will come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have applied to the wound as much as necessary, put oil and sinew on the vein to sew up hastily, and do so for every cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sickness of the vein in the left hand is worth the disease of the mouse, and do it just as I told you over to the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the liver is worth all kinds of diseases of the body, just as illnesses from the marrow, and retention of flowers, and illness of the kidneys, and joints, and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its liver are such that when patients put in stones into hot water and rub on the vein until it dies, and place above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and through above the foot they take out a lot of blood; then healing takes place, but only if you go bigger or wider than the ankle, or to the foot.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal on the foot, then beware of the swellings that are under it, and the healing by piercing through as when cutting. So let the fumes be made.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If he cannot come out from it, so put his foot in the water, and let well drain the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	If the veins require the first time, if he restarts it on the top a little because they are salty; do not doubt of the nerves, as we have said, and do so for the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the groin are in the heel of force, and its cutting is worth pain of the hamstring when it's for blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And if the quality of its cutting is such that the patient takes or bathes in it, and you strain over the heel 4 times in twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open; and when it opens, cut in all ways that you can, and in crossing; and be sure to copy it, because the veins are swollen, and they return like the hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	If you do not find it, then your body will be weakened by any rain or pain from the head or lower back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and do as much care for the wound so that you see, and then release the bandage, and put cotton on and tighten; now she is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of venous issues
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	They are made of horns, or thorns, or needles; and venous constriction is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing out the wound, or by piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this venous constriction done by piercing is in two ways: either it is all fire, or on fire; and the venous constriction that is made by piercing and extracting the wound is done in 13 places of the body, for one is at the top of the head, one near the neck, and two more on each side of the neck; and the venous constriction below the chin; and below the shoulders; and above the elbows; and above the knees; and between the two arms; and between the two legs; and between the two ankles; and it does not treat the wound, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the body, which weakens no one, as we do with venous bleeding; and it should not be made in any case of overloading, but only when all the body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of sickness it is convenient to ventouse, or out of custom, we bring each one every hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and at each time; because there are those who, when they need to ventouse, have a heavy head; and such as experience redness and inflammation on their face, and head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and some who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have pulled out the tongue, and swollen with it; and there are those who see, or feel pain, and death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and myself when it is time for the month, we command to be ventoused after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sick person of the mouse should be treated in the warmth of the chest … so that comes to the eyes, and it is not fitting that this is done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is in place of the sainie of the cephalique, and it is not fitting for those who have hot complexion or who are suffering from catarrh, because this causes great harm; and therefore do not use the vigilance, nor who have a cold head with illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from this often become blind, and therefore it is fitting to apply the venous suction a little lower by the examination of blindness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The venous evacuation in the neck is in place of the sainie of the head and the basilic, and therefore it is fitting to apply the tightening of the belly, and cutting of the channel of the pommon, and touching, and repletion; and it should not be pressed too much, because if it holds too tightly, it causes blindness or stomach or bowel obstruction.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The patient has two costelz (shoulder blades) close to the col (neck), so it causes pain in the chest, head, eyes and migraines, and strangling, and there is pain in the roots of the teeth, and is in place of the suffering of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the healer to express his hand when applying, so he does not cut the artery, and does not wait for the blood to flow afterwards.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	Cutting in the lower part of the chin causes mouth diseases and corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and is in place of the suffering of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Cutting on the shoulder blades causes disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Cutting on the shoulders is as much to be feared as cutting three veins in the arm, because it brings out blood from these large veins; and instruct the healer that he should not pierce too deeply, for the skin of these areas is thin, and knows its nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The swelling on the flank is valued at the groin and in the belly, and it is necessary that the swelling be great and of sand, for it needs to be treated well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it causes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The swellings on the legs are treated openly because they attract blood from all over the body, and value themselves at ancient pains of rain, mares, and bladder, and bring forth flowers; and in place of the two knees and two shins, they weaken the body after a long time, and cause fainting in many cases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put on the swelling is that you first fill it, and tie it temporarily, and move it equally, and do not cease to do this until you see the body swell red and inflamed, and draw out the red from the wound; then again, put back the swells, and take care in the disposition of the body, because there are many who have turned pale, and you should be wary: if it happens only once, it is best to do so; and it is necessary to make large wounds, and deep ones too; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the lump is small, so it must be injured twice: once to make subtle the way of the large vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is not very thick, so it must be injured a third time: and when we tend to the vein little by little, we suffer only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we tend to the vein much, repeatedly start again; and if it is not thick, then pierce deeply: and when the ends are reached, so that the keys can be perceived suddenly, cut at him who has a large skin and hard, and those with hairy pores, that you anoint them with the oil of the perforating ventouses, and dissolving; either violet oil, or almond sweet oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it's in yvew, then of cresson, lily, camomile, or another similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is great and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or balsam, or anise oil.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if those with skin that is sensitive and large pores, should not be put on oil, but should be washed after the application of rose water, or cold water, or grapevine juice, or cucumber juice, or other similar waters.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with much moisture, lift him up from the cold, or from the water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those with great swellings lift him up from old wine, or cold water, or the decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things. And they should not be sutured after bathing nor in a bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and he should not sleep afterwards, because he must be sutured and when he is sutured.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And instruct him who is recovering to take cold things, such as pears, grapes, and lettuce, as easily as possible, and similar things; and eat small meat, and cheese from the chest, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, should take honey syrup and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, eat little, and eat small meat, fish, pigeons, and plums; and on the day he will recover, he must drink more than he eats; and it is fitting to give some men honey twice a day or after recovery, for comfort of the principal members; but be subtle about it, not because they are hot to drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The poultices that are applied to be heated are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and podagra, and on the stomach and the boil and the joints and the hamstrings, because these members do not bear to be struck or struck with force, and only for the purpose of attracting the blood from one part to another, as we place poultices on the breasts when they are healthy; to thin out the viscosity that is in the member, just as we put poultices on the stomach and on the boil to ease the member; and take away the pain, when there is swelling or a stone, taking away by its attractive power by chance the swelling or the stone from its place; and thus they are done when one places them on the liver and on the mouse when it has retained poultice, and these poultices are emptied to suck only; and sometimes are applied together with heat, and sometimes plain water, as in the case of painful pleurisy, and in such a manner that we fill the poultice with hot water or with which there have been suitable herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction to apply with fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And they have two fingers of length and half a palm from top to bottom, and one finger inside the middle, like inserting an awl, so that it does not prick the patient when placing on the limb; and at the middle has a crossbar of iron or wood, for securing a bandage, with large and small sizes according to the diseases and age of those who take them; because the suction vents of children are different from those of adults, and thin ones than fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus you must put this suction on the limb: wrap the wax string or linen around it, and place it inside the suction through the crossbar in the middle of the suction, so that the light shines at the bottom of the suction and does not burn the patient; then place the suction on the limb, with the two fingers above the opening we previously mentioned, so that when you take it out, the vapor escapes, and remove the suction; wrap linen around as before, and replace it frequently, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the treatment of the chest disease called pleurisy, when you are full of pain, there is no joint or swelling and it does not become painful unless it is placed on a limb alone, and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Unless swellings occur in members, for it is not possible to put pouces on a thin skin such as lips and gums, or similar ones; and when you take out the discharge from a nose, if there are two or one, and others like them; and the quality of use so that when you find swellings that are in clear and clean water without injury, take them; and put a net in clear water until they become accustomed and have nothing in their stomachs; and then be taken away from vein and pouce, then rub the member until it is red, and place on swellings; and when they are full and swollen, if it can be put on pouces again, put them on, for this is very valuable afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If that is not so, then lift the limb out of its binding, and then into water, very well, and then warm it up; and if the limbs are healthy too soon after the removal of the bandages, moisten with a linen cloth in cold water, and put on, until the swelling subsides; and if many swellings multiply, put on vitriol crushed or vinegar, and similar things, until they subside; or you should put on one-eighth of boiled peels, and let them sit on the limb, so that now it will be stanched; and if you have more need, then take other bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the bandages do not come away, then rub the limb with fresh salt, or prick it with a needle until the blood comes out, and then put on the bandage; and as soon as they feel the wound, they will dry up; and when you see them weeping, then sprinkle some powder of aloes and millet flour or ashes, so that they will now stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	The book of fractures begins
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the art of this chapter is unknown to any of the ancient books, nor have we read them in letters; and because of this, the knowledge of our land has been lost, for I found none that were good; and I know nothing, except by the knowledge of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated it, and by experience, and by the habit of my life; and I have described here what is contained in this chapter, and have abridged it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the wounds that must be treated, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in this prologue of this book the explanations and the chapters where the wise men put their understanding, and take care to explain it further, so that those who have learned from experience know and learn this noble art, and teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When a fracture or dislocation or twists or swelling comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the sick person from one side and the other, if no remedy is available, for weakness of body, or sickness, or old age; or if the joints are very tight, or too cold; and attend chills caused by cold, namely frosty stools, and charred meat of bird and deer, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty foods, and do not stuff oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about an abscess or swelling in the joint, or the spread of matter to a member; if you return to the previous treatment for the sick person who has used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore itself, it is fitting that you nourish the patient with foods that cause great swelling, if they have viscosity, such as bread cooked in water, and cheese, and eggs, and butter, and pancakes, and fish fresh from the river, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	But swelling causes more representation of wounds and the break occurs faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of old people and decrepit ones cannot be well mended or soldered according to their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor those who are too soft, like the bones of little children; but there is no cure. Reinforce the broken bone with large splints which secure and join the member together, so that it will heal as it was before; and do not neglect its work, for this is why they must nourish themselves with great foods, just as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or thigh, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that occur at the neck, and others from cutting, just like the length of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there are fractures with wounds, and fractures with a small split or crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each type has its own method and proper instrument for treatment, according to what the memory recalls in its place; and it is known that fractures of bone are recognized by this: that the limb is twisted, and the joint is open due to movement, and feels near the touch of the hand; but when there is no twisting or kinking, and the patient does not feel great pain, unless there is a fracture; yet it can still have twisting, splitting, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not good to move the fingers at all, but apply the medicines that come after this, and then pull it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And when the fracture in the arm exists and are two parts dislocated, it is now necessary to set them equally, so that the abscess comes; and if an abscess forms there, leave no day, until the abscess is calmed down; then set it at ease with the bone that you can easily set straight, and know that the restoration of this part is lighter than that of which it has pieces; then pull, as seems good after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, when extending two parts, it is so with hands or a piece, or with small members, or with two cords, or one cord and a hand; and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the limb are cut short, then pull back all the additions in their places on the bone, as you can, and take care that through your work there does not come to the patient an injury or pain; and adjust well both joints of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: if the dressing is made well and not too tightly constrained, nor pressed as those do who make it come by their own work, a hot contraction and stiffness of the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is set straight, instruct the patient well that it does not move, neither while he watches nor when he sleeps, nor when he turns or in any other way; and be sure that the limb is so securely fixed that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	Because when he feels no pain, it is not set straight, and you must put him in such position that he feels no pain; and be sure to keep it properly aligned so that tortuous movements do not occur when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The broken limb is of various size, shape, and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For small members like arms and hands, one should wrap a soft cloth around with glue; and for larger ones like thighs and legs: one should wrap it with a wide and hard rope, because the large ropes encircle the entire limb and tighten it equally on all sides, without any slack. Then tie tight over the joints lightly, three or four times according to the size of the member, and press your hand into the middle of the knot so that the rope becomes more snug; then go up towards the break and tighten less, until the break starts to move a little; then soften the rope little by little, as much as you can get out from under the limb's healthy part, then put on another rope, and turn it back over to the limb's break; then go down to the lower part of the break, and tighten moderately, not too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first rule above; then insert cloth or drapes between the ropes until they are all equal, then tie everything from above with a bandage, and then put your stitches well-made on top, if there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If it has a swelling or abscess, put an absorbing dressing over the abscess, and apply heat to relieve the swelling; then release the swelling after some time. Then strain on your joints, and tie with a gauze bandage of moderate width, using wood from which clivuses are made, or palm fronds, according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is advisable that the bandage you put on the break should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and so long as it suits the limb of smallness or largeness; then tie on your joints just as you did at the first binding; then wrap above with a thread made from flax, not too thick nor too thin, but soft linen; for if the thread is too thick, like I have wanted to make works of the foolish ones who make their bindings with corded linen threads, and it's a great error, because the binding can't be equal if it's too subtle, and it cannot fit that there should be less space between each joint than two fingers' width.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is weak from the pains of the arrows after the straining in their safe place, then put stoppers made of linen or wool on them, so they will not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will tell you the cure as follows.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to strain the arrows every member at once, the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because when the members are large, it is not good to put arrows on every member at once, but rather after five or seven days, or longer according to your safety and a cure previously made; and here is how the ancient plastermakers used to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that is kept in the walls of the mill, mix it with a lot of wine, and make this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, for this is the common way of using the plaster to restore fractures in many cases, especially women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to treat plastering the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take 2 handfuls of starch and lard and honey and alum and gum arabic and myrrh, an amount equal to the size of X; mirror and aloes, an amount equal to V; alechil VIIII; and make powder, and mix with a mixture of honey and vinegar; if the complexion of the flesh is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores the broken bones quickly, and saves many lives.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to treat plastering that is good for twisting: take myrrh and vismalve, an amount equal to the size of X; mirror and aloes, an amount equal to VIIII; acacia VI; boric Armenian X, grind well, and confit with water or a mixture of honey and vinegar, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to splint is to join and wrap the bones and to fix their limbs, and to soothe the pain that follows, and use the bone to cut and break the fracture: take new linen, apply a poultice in ease and in oil cooked, and put on the limb.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore the health, but they are good for soothing an abscess.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to splint that restores the broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth leaves, crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to splint for restoring the break of the bone and for easing the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of sallow (willow), camomile, flowers of violets, flour of vinegar, one part from each; and crush, and mix with wine, and apply to the limbs when heated, and mix with moist coriander water, or just water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to apply plaster more strongly than the first, when an abscess is formed on the restored limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of willow, and seeds of flax, balsam, meadowsweet, and sanctejuice, and flowers of violets and camomile, one part from each; and crush, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, there is no place to put a broken limb for repair so that the salve made of wax and oil is applied, and nothing else, and he says it should be between too soft and too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen says that you must put a broken limb on, to restore, things dry with a little hot, just like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat an injury and pain: take mallow and horse chestnut, or pigeon feathers, and vinegar, and cut them equally, and grind them, and make a plaster with the paste and the limb.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then wait a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor does he bruise his bone again; if it does not happen by hands, but if pain comes to the limb, whether it prurites, inflames, or swells, you must act quickly, and remove it, and now apply a plaster; and take light bandages, and a sponge soaked in moist water, and plunge into the water, and lift up the limb until the itching ceases and the pain is soothed; then let rest the limb for an hour, then put on a dry linen cloth, moistened with vinegar or rose oil, and tie it up with a bandage, until you are sure of the bone being set; and rest the inflammation in the limb, and soothe away the pain, then resume subtle dressing, and a little plaster, but do not press too hard as before; and proceed subtly until he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess is red and swollen and painful and inflamed, I have a bone that has been broken into all of them, and you must apply plaster and tie it up again, as you did first when it was even.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the member anything of what we have said, if you do not untie it after three days or four or five, but rather leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the break heals and the surrounding bone approaches; then hold back a bit more than before, and let the flesh swell again, as I told you earlier; and if you see that it dries up more than necessary, know that there will be no recovery. Therefore, do not cut off the swelling from the member, but rather apply hot water to it every time you untie it, and let it dry on its own for three days, then cut off the swelling with the wound; this is bad, and it leads to painful recoveries, and I see nothing else than lacerations and wrong healing.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of different kinds of breakage
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of breakages, and various forms, and the causes are determined; for there is a breakage that is caused by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone (colz oste) breaks all the way through to the bone just beneath it, as if struck by a blow or thrust with force; and this kind of breakage is called «haichure».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword strikes the bone from above and pierces it, this kind of breakage is called "absolute"; and there are two kinds of wounds resulting from these breaks: great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has been pierced by a blow that has embedded itself, or is a fracture, or of the collarbone on stone, or of the shoulder on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a persistent fracture, which approaches the tendon that is under the bone, or above the bone, and is this wound big or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is closed in the bone with a subtlety like that of our sewing, and there is a small fracture, and because of this it is called "capillary" fracture; and if the wound was made by hitting the stone, or falling, or some similar thing, and the piece of bone entered inside, and its ends are as thin as those of the coppersmith when he heats them on the copper pot, then something gets stuck.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have moist bones under their head, like that of an infant; and it occurs in all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are separated as if from stones; and I will speak on behalf of them.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by removing them from under them, and the inquiry has tested them, and by the corrupting fire that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like resemblance is known because when the bone has been discovered and the surface is rubbed upon, if it opens the fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be careful for any accidents in the patient, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of understanding, extension, palsiness, fever, and the eyes are forced out and become red, and other similar symptoms more than usual, then it cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any extraordinary accidents, and you hope for recovery, as soon as you begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when you come first to me, and it's in winter, it is fitting to withdraw the bone before the eighteenth day after the moon.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in this state, so hastening to withdraw the bone before the seventh day, and thus making the flesh underneath the bone corrupt, and bringing on the accidents that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just next to the covering of the brain, it is fitting that you cut through the broken part thus: and when you take the head from the patient's hand, and uncover above the bone in all ways as you can, and on the shape of the wound so soft as you can, and if blood comes to uncovering the bone, or an abscess, then he needs what is necessary, and it is that you fill the hollow with moist drapes soaked in olive oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed, and be sure of no further bleeding; then start cutting under the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways: one way is that you copy the shape before the narrow cutting, and it's like this:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then after a second more extensive cutting than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have to cut with multiple tools of various sizes, some small and others large, pointed or flat, made of iron; and work lightly, so as not to hit the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is advised that you pierce through it, so that with tools you administer cuts with sharp edges, not by striking only once but repeatedly, lest the point go beyond the softness of the bone; and on the edge of the cutting tool, leave a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and have multiple tools, one for each joint, so that you cut through all bones with sharp edges; and this is the form of the three types of cuts:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	In the case of piercing through bone that is broken, put it there for a little while on the bone, and turn to your two sides until you know that the bone has been pierced; then put the tournure elsewhere after a little while, and do this all around, and afterwards cut at the incisures the space between the parts, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you take out the bone with your hand, or on one of the things that you have in such as pliers, nails; and be careful not to touch the brain or the skull.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut out the bone, if there is still some part that remains attached to the bone, but it cannot be removed with any other instrument like an incisor, it is better to make it more thin and subtle than the others; and if no small bones or scales remain, then take them lightly away from the instruments; afterwards cure the wound as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And other types of treatment are thus said by the Galenians, which is more so; and the oath is very strong, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to uncover a part of the bone, at that place or where the fracture opens up, so that when you have uncovered that part, you put under the lower edge of this cut-out lens-like structure, because it is in this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut into one part, and the damaged part is on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then with a small hammer on top, so that you carefully copy the bone all around, and take care well of protecting yourself from the cloth below; if it is rough against the bone, carefully remove the bone, because removing the bone causes harm, and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the break of the bone is not pierced until just after the cloth, and the bone is hit only from above, with small pieces, it will cover again that roughness, and remove the scales at the subtle raspener which you must have different quantities for, in order to give to each one the most comfortable treatment, according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have many coarser rasps and after more subtle ones, and do not cease doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other capillary measurements and subtle fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its address; and this is a thing that no one can reply to he who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the syphilitic is uncovered, it is necessary to apply linen bandage according to its size, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another bandage doubled twice or thrice, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it over the first one; and do this more lightly than you can, lest you burden the syphilitic, and apply from above another binding, and do not tighten it too much until the wound is only soothed; and leave it for one or two days, until the abscesses are eased, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lion's root, flour of vermillion, incense powder, and ars alba, and similar things; and make a powder and apply it to the wound, and administer after-wards medicines with mastication, lest the pain be increased, for when bowels are assembled above the cloth of the brain, they will be corrupted and cause great malice in the patient; because when something mordant is applied on top of the syphilitic, it festers under it.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Preventively then, if no accidents occur to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful in its presence of doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come through fire only because of the medicine that we have placed on it, which has virtue, then it is fitting to take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and in glue I wrap, and I place it on the wound; then apply the treatment of cures as needed, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the two forearms are often broken in two pieces, or one piece alone, for these are two bones; and this below is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is fractured or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two pieces is broken, it is fitting to put your little bone or piece of the nail into that break, and place it inside your finger joint, and in the pouchet (wrist) for safety, until the nail grows back according to its natural figure; and do this gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the arm and it cannot be straightened, so that you put equal to the head of a stick one foot thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If the fracture is in two parts, do it again and hurry to restore the first day if you can; but if not, after seven or ten days, when the abscesses are closed, then bind to the head of the bone with linen strips, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you bind the other part, if there is a fracture; and the linen strips are so thick that they fill up the holes of the bone.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And said any restorer that you should moisten the linen in butter and move each one every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem good to me, but it is likely that they are moist in the making of both wheat and powder of millen; then leave the tent, until the bones are hard, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And in no case do not put on or on nails of goose in its place, and if it is cold wrapped around, and holds the wound, and blows the patient with air; then see how you look.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the nose while you are working, apply a clot or cotton soaked in oil rose, or in one half of vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not come, apply plaster beforehand, made from wheat flour, and powdered incense, mixed with wheat flour; then put on light stoves, and do not tie the nose; and if the wound at the nose is small, and it breaks into little pieces, then extract the instruments suitable for this, and cut the incision, and apply bandages, and ointments convenient for this; and if there is no injury inside the nose, apply the treatment of tents, and put plints in place, until he is cured.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the removal of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is removed below, and there is no wound to be found, and the fracture is absent except for swelling alone, without bruising in the marrow, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, that you put your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if it is on the left jawbone, put your index finger of the right hand, and insert the fracture gently, while holding back with the other hand, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is on both sides (II), it is necessary to administer an extension of II parts, so that it may be even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth have come about, or rotting, then tie up with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken mandible a hot cloth; and put on double drapels; and put on one large stethal well made, or piece of leather equal long and wide according to the mandible, and bind it above the muscle that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve light viands.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, if you release it to four days, and then put back to its original shape; and apply plaster upon, with powder of mill ground with abundant oil or flour of sesame, after that which you have oiled the hot cloth; and apply the plaster linen lightweight, and when the plaster cools, and the patient's disposition does not change, let it remain so long as they are well. Many times they are well in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscessed foot comes, as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and a wound together, repair the no small piece of bone that is protruding; for such subtlety in the removal of the bone is useful to those.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then expand it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all those pieces of bone, and there is no remaining part, then dress the wound, if it is large, and put on suitable bandages to bind well, so that it may be healed.
de la forcele	of the fistula
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fistula breaks multiple times in front of the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and displaced twice, with fragments, and this is lighter to restore; or there is a fracture with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the surgeons are thus when the break is near an injury, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the aid with the feeling of the broken bone; and the other extends the arm towards the part; then put equal the break to your two hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no appearance or swelling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have need to further extend, put on the patient an iron sphere of cloth or linen, round about the shoulder, so that it is as large as your necessity requires; and gently stretch the feeling, and hold tight the sphere with your hand, so that you put equal the break, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot treat the head of the feeling, because it comes into the very marrow, it is fitting that the patients lie on their hateful bed, and put under the shoulder a soft pillow, and have the ministers pour water down the back, until the bones of the feeling are raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the break to your two feet, and if you find any debris, it is advisable to cut them up; and take out the pieces lightly, and if the bones cannot join together for any swelling, if one of the incisors cuts through, but put on the forceps this instrument, in order to ward off the splinter:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it resembles a spoon, and is not hair, and be as large as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, just like the roughness of the wound that you made when you broke the bones; and when you are sure that there is a large abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt a large abscess, then apply the dressing of cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	If a swelling comes upon the foot, so moistens the cloth in rose oil and in ash and in wine, and puts it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it is filled with pain and swelling, is to put on the bone dressed with powder from the mill of flour and honey, and place light cloths over it, and if necessary, place a spear beneath; then take a great bandage of one palm in width, and place two cloths double on top of cloths, and the dressing; then take a fine needle three fingers thick and long, and pass it through the center of the bandage so that the head of the bandage is hanging; and put the needle over the break, and turn the bandage over the shoulder, and under the jointed limb; and pull each part, and when you see that the limb holds the break immediately, and you see clearly that the needle does not move above the broken bone, then reward each day, and when the ligament is stretched, bind it again; and have the patient lie on his back, and put a little oil below the joint, to lift the assistant up; so will alleviate the break of the shoulder by the tension of the shoulder blade, or you tie the arm to the collar, and do not untie if bad accidents come about, for twenty days; then reapply the dressing, if you see that it needs it, and bind and leave it thus, until he is restored; and she is restored in twenty-eight days, and less often than at other men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder break
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the shoulder breaks or becomes crooked, as long as it remains in place, and does not move because of pressure; if you appear according to the figure of the break, and straighten it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the patient powder from the mill with much oil and light strokes, and make a double bandage; then put on a large and subtle needle, one inch larger than the shoulder, and remove any hair at a point of the shoulder so that the needle enters smoothly, cutting through linen threads evenly; and then bind it tightly with a strong bandage, so that the needle does not move from its place, and inspect each bandage every day; whenever it loosens, rebind, and set the needle equal to itself, if it has moved out of its place, and relieve the patient on their chest; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, release it, and be sure, for it is not that the bone has entered easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes and not below the level, then they do so, and put in, the bone, and do what we have said in breaking the abscess of the sharpness.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The piece is sometimes broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; it breaks often without cause.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it inclines downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and shortage of blood, and swelling, and sometimes vomiting blood, and opens up the veins in the broken bone, and the sensation becomes better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on their back, and you place a cloth between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring together the two ribs with your hands, and carefully put them in such a manner as they can be made to fit; then put on plaster casts and bandages over the subtle part of salt, or some lighter substance, and wrap it up in a square piece of cloth, and tie it tightly around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the knot round the back, and tighten it immediately, and reward each hour with a new cast, and if they loosen, you should tighten them; and if it pleases to untie them, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the patient, or pain or abscess, you hasten, and untie, and shave the plaster, and address those who came to visit in ways of cures; then remove the plaster, and bind them until they are sane.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the breast
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Which is that the breaking of the breast comes only from the weight on the large after the back, and in the chest within, and does not happen more because they are bony; and it feels very well when being inquired about the two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedies are such that you place equal the break, as it is fitting.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply plaster, and tie with a stake, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the breast inclines inward, the patient feels great pain, and point, as well as pleurisy, because the bone punctures the membrane; and they are inflamed with pus, and swollen, and vomit a lot of bloody matter, and it's due to illness, and the old ones have put much effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if to those who say it is fitting to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to ward off the fracture in advance.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this unless it has come from a source of flesh.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is from a source, that it be pure.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that one should not put poultices on the limb to cause bleeding, and it seems like reason; however, there is doubt that poultices do attract blood in excesses due to the weak state of the body.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the limb with a wet linen in hot oil, and put tourniquets between the ribs to keep the joint even, then either be cured of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain because of the bone which pierces the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is fitting to cut above the broken shoulder blade, and it is necessary to put on some instruments to guard the wound; and therefore one must drill into the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound if they are great, and cure with plasters until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the surface, then put moist cloth in oil on the surface of the abscess, and place it; cure until the abscess grows into what it should be on the costal side where it must be, so that it can drain onto the surface, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of a broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No bone ever breaks when the neck is bent, and little has happened when it cracks; and similarly at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens and you don't know if it will be cured or not, if you see that the hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move nor stretch, and when you press with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many types of conditions, and if they are silent and feel well when you restrict them with a point, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will recover from wounds, if they are put on treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it will be cured or not, take care if the feet are softened, and if accidents are in the hands, and if the vertebrae move suddenly and fall through with voluntary will; and when one has taken notice of his bowels, they make a movement with voluntary will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	When he is swollen on his back and it hurts him, if he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Knowing that it is mortal: if one does not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this happens to him repeatedly, then it is the lighter condition.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward him if he has a hot abscess, putting oil of rose or oil of mouse on the spine, until it is appeased; then put on a comfortable and dry plaster, binding it with a bandage, and commanding the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bones are broken, it is to cover the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble both lips of the wound, if they are great, with a suture, then treat with ointment of juniper, until he is healed; and if the bone is fractured, which is called "broken knee", pour into the pouch of your left hand and put it equal to the right hand, then apply plaster and splint, if necessary; then bind him, and if there is a broken bone, make them up again, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the femur
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	it happens that the femur bone is fractured, and if it is, then if it has caused only a slight inflammation in the head; and let it be long and curved, and come to the limb, causing the patient pain at the joint, pointing, and swelling as if broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above the fracture, until you are above the breakage; and you see which part is the fracture and its shape; and if the fracture is only in the head alone, then you put an even cast, until it has taken on a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it curves inward, then you make the patient lie on his stomach, until the restoration of that fracture has been prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have put it back in place even, then apply plaster, then apply a stake of wood or horn, and bind the break so that it does not move; and apply ointment on both sides of the bone, until it is set straight.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to lie on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes up in the flesh, do not touch it until it is smoothed out, and apply the plaster as we said before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as needed, without any other injury, for this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder; and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of two methods. One method is that you take a stick made from the bone marrow in the form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Instruct the patient to let both shoulders move freely, and put them up high, and secure the patient on this bed; then lift the broken arm onto the chest, so it comes to ease, and has an arrow of a splint, then put upon any heavy thing or the servants stretch out until; then place the mire on the break equal in both hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is that they place the patient on his back, and tie the hand to his neck, then instruct both ministers to pull each of these things: one pulling above at the break with their hands, and the other below at all the joints, and stretching out each one to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is further, then tighten both the joint below and above the break, and stretch out each one of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the fracture is near the shoulder of the shoulder, so that you put a median ligature below the bone, and another to the side of the cut, then it is wise to put the lighter ligature gently under the wound, until the fracture is even on its own, and on the side; then put even the fracture, if possible, and tie it, so that the abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If the abscesses come, do not tighten it just yet for seven years, and put a linen bandage moistened with rose oil, until the abscesses are allayed; then tie it, and take care of the manner of tying it so that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; put a dressing, and tie tightly on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if no other thing prevents it, or if the bones are moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone moves, then use a needle, and place a larger and stronger needle than the others on the break one, and insert one inch between each needle, so each needle is as large as it passes through three parts of the break; then strain upon the needles, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter on the break.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the arrangement of the needles and the straining, as we have said, when you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess, leaving it for seven days, as we have said; then observe each one of three days the link, that inflammation does not set in, or any swelling comes to the limb, where there are signs coming from the needle because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If he is ill, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents happen, he should not be released until three days or more have passed, and the patient lies on his back, with his hands on his stomach, and puts on below the shoulder joint one cussin of plain linen evenly, and observes each hour of the day or night, whether the broken limb moves or is softened; for the patient will become ill by the virtue of medicine, and eat the meat that we have placed before him in this manner, so that the meat is soft at first; and when he comes to take food again, it becomes thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and joint should be treated for forty days in its entirety; therefore, he should be released and given a bath and administered remedies of ointments to relieve his illness.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is swollen and blocked, so it does not open after one or two days.
de la brisure du bras	of a broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the "forearm" (little bone) and the "humerus" (big bone), for this reason the one that forms the pouch is small, and it is this one; and the other is large, and it is located below, towards the little finger; by chance, only the big forearm was broken or only the small one, and by chance they broke both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small forearms are broken, the restoration is light, and healing; and when the big ones are broken, it is bad healing, and more grievous than when both were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's a broken little finger, they can make it stretch slightly lighter, and put it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If it's a big finger, they must pull it harder; and stretch it up to the wrist, and tighten the pouch of the hand higher than others, so that the small fingers go lower than others, and the patient crosses his own arm on himself, and looks at the same cussin (wrist) more upwards, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the two skilled hands to the part below the joint in the hand or at the wrist, one of them on each side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put it in its proper place, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	If the break has pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no remaining deviation that can be taken to hold the cure, and it cannot be restored to its proper place, then cut out (remove) the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	If there is an injury at the break, I have spoken to the singular healer about it; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration process the abscesses are not present, but glue and cloth made from cerote, oil of roses, and white wax is applied, it should not be too hard or too soft; and bind the cloth gently above, until the abscesses are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerote, and put on the plaster of flour ground with oil, mixed with a lot of water; and make it like an arrow, so that the arrow is set firmly and slightly wider than the others; and notice how many arrows you need, or more: whether the break is in one bone or two; and bind above the break more tightly than elsewhere, and always less when removing, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and make sure the cloths on top of the break are soft and moist, not too hard or harsh; and put in threads, which are strained with linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some evil accidents come to the limb, just as itching comes to the skin of the limb, it is necessary that you warm up the limb with hot water, until the itching is calmed down, and let the limb not be too cramped to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the binding, and if the joints are loosened and the bones deviated, and so similar, address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling does not come back to the limb, because it is too strained, then you should loosen it a little, and let it stay that way for some days, until the swelling goes away, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	If no such thing happens to the patient as we have said, so that he does not come to injury within 20 years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	wherein he holds his hands to the neck, and if his neck is even, he guards against movement and numbness, and sleeps on his back; and observes that this fracture will be restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps twenty days, according to the composition and nature of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of a hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Observes that on the back of the hand, and near the wrist, there is little fracture, but only a frequent pain.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And if the finger of the hand is broken or sprained, it is prudent that the patient should cross his fingers and sit upright in a straight line; then he puts his hand on an extended palm, and extends the jointed bones, and makes them even with the joints, until they are well joined; and he applies plaster and splints, unless there comes any swelling to the abscess; then he sets an arrow according to the quantity of the wound; and so it is taken out in a bandage of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	In case of a fracture in the pelvis near the belly of the limb, make a splint from strips and instruct the patient to bind his broken limb with its own plant; then tie it with a long strip, so that it is as strong as the tendons of the hand, and the binding should be done as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the elbow, so it may be fitting to put a splint above and below in the limb, so that the wrist is straightened and set right, then tie everything together around the hand, and secure the joint between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of us in the two joints, so if it is swollen, make it even, as it may be fitting; and bind with the limb, and if you see that it is necessary to put a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and it does not move; and if the fracture is in other joints, such as in the index or the other one, so also make it even, binding it with the healthy joint that is next; or bind all of them together, whichever seems best, or putting on a splint, as the swelled one may be.
de la cuixe brisie	of the cross breaks
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bones of the cross are often broken and if one sees it when it is being turned in front and behind, and then the restoration is as if you tie the ligament above the break, and also below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patients tie their face up with cloth, then each one extends his linen band equally; and this is when the break meets the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the cross, then it is one of the ligaments at the joint and the others are below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, and then it is either one of the ligaments near the joint or extension below; then put the tourniquet on the bone just as much as his two hands can hold it, so that it follows its natural shape, and then apply plaster, and ligament, lest abscesses come from this place.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If it has an abscess hot, then let him calm it down first, and he will return to his work and his cure; the cure is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap a bandage around the fracture for two or three times, and hold off the swelling; then turn the leg so that the toes reach to the root of the nail, and pour one long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the groin, and tie the chief with the thread above; then turn up the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then put stitches on the fracture, and put a stitch on the bone of the leg; then wrap soft cloth between the leg and the thigh to tighten evenly the constraint, then begin to form three or four turns around the fracture; and as you go higher up on the fracture, and less tightens it; then take out two threads that you have poured between the leg and the thigh, and tie three stitches that are above, then return below to the chief of the thread, until you see from under the foot; and if the constraint does not move from its place, then let him be so, but when there comes no more swelling or inflammation, nor any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is, then the dislocation and address it as we have said many times. And if he has pieces of bone that are caught, then they must be taken out, if possible; and if not possible, then they must be broken and extracted; and the cure should be done as we have said, until he is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is broken so that a stone can be placed inside, as in the shoulder and on the arm; all the time, in this way, the patient does not suffer from a broken bone.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is known that the bone is restored in three days, or less or more, according to the diversity of the constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the wound on the groin.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	The thing is broken near the groin but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	But if it breaks, then it's only a split or an opening, and there is great pain from the wound and the sensation of pain.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is done by setting equal what is broken into its two parts, until it is assembled then one can move; then put the plaster, and insert an oval needle if needed, and tie it as it should be; then follow all the dispositions we have said for other breaks, like a severe abscess and similar appearance; put on each case what he needs, until he is cured.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	There are two bones in the leg, one called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and every other fracture comes with it when it reaches the arm, and for that reason their restoration is like that of the arm, and all wounds are equal. And if the two bones break together, then turn the leg from all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, then straighten them in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the big bones are broken, then feel great pain, and see it well; and straighten below.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And so apply the extension, and set it equal, and tie the wires equally; but beware, if the break is ugly, and there are more pieces, then make the extension smaller and lighter, according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to let all of his work be completed, then take two strips of cloth that tie around the leg from the knee down to the ankle; and tie them tight as well. Then wrap them around both sides of the leg and make sure they are not loose in either direction, and so it is fine; and no one should be given more than one strip of cloth around the leg, and if it is clothed, then put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this when there is a break where he has been injured; and move each leg every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident; thus does the cure until he is safe.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the broken bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but at times with the two feet the bones come to a break and do a little damage, and there are only few cases of further damage.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it has broken the bones of the foot and you see these bones overlapping one over the other, if the sick person lays his foot on the ground, just like he wishes to walk, and then puts his foot on the side where the bones are raised, now put your foot on top of the bone so that they align themselves in their place; then apply plaster and poultices under the foot a small pad of two wooden pins, then tie the foot firmly afterwards, and other things which you may need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, if you cut the ligament, because you will find the bones in their place, whether they are broken, dislocated, or misaligned.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If it has any broken bones, restore them, as we have said about the bones of the hand; then place a splint on the broken bone according to its length, and so that it is one inch larger, then put this little table under the foot that I have said, and the binding will be done; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then put a splint on each one according to its quantity, wrapped in an I-inch strip of linen, and bind the table under the foot; and while standing above the head of the table, covering the belly of the foot, so that it is held well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, since we have said them; and heal each accident as is fitting.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of a bone in the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman is broken, if it swells, then incline it to the back of the shoulder, and hold it behind; then fill the bag with the natural juices of the sick person, and put in as much cotton as I have; then tie the woman's bow, and lift the shoulder bit by bit, and then pull out the cotton, until it comes into the opening of the nature, and the bone returns with its stool; and when she wants to urinate, if there is still some cotton, then put it in again, and when she has urinated, take it out, and do this for 7 days or so: and if you see it restored, take a vessel of wool, and tie a string around the perforated one, and pour all the vessel into the nature; then blow into the string tightly, until the vessel is emptied inside: nature will return to the broken bone; then fill with cotton again and leave it for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone at the joint of the arm is broken, or in the woman, so it is reset as we have said about the bone of the hedge; and these close breaks are not hidden from those who apply their study and use, and they attend my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaks signify a greater number of people on the right path of restoration: then so.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the female member is broken, take a goosegut and pour it into the wound; then wrap it tightly around, and let it be for three days or until it is tied up again, and it will quickly heal.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is great, as the bone of the shoulder or the humerus or something similar, that they should be healed immediately, if the healings that we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the wound is clean, then apply vinegar to it. If you have no other option, then do it again on the same day, or the next day, unless an abscess appears on the site of the break.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If an abscess appears on the site of the break, then leave the restoration for the next new day, until the abscess is healed, and do not touch it or apply it again on the third day or the fourth, lest you will bring about a bad misfortune.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the bone is broken and appears near the joint uncovered, it would be fitting to put it at a lighter point in your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	If the extension is not suited for placing evenly in your hands, then use this instrument which is made of iron, with seven or eight inches in length, and the width is according to the size of the wound; it is the task of the surgeon that he grips three or four fingers on each such cure of a break; and it should be thin and not curved under compression on the limb at your work, and thick in front, and large from the midpoint towards the fore, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And call this "palainche", because it is fitting that the head of the curved bone be placed above the cheekbone of the skull; and blow with one breath until it returns, so that they are even in front and back.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the splints cannot firmly grasp the bone, so that it fits well, then you must copy the head of the bone, as long as the splints have a chance.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot set the bone as we have said, then copy it with an instrument that is suitable for the task, whether cutting or incising, to your best ability; and take back what has remained stuck in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is set and the patient feels great pain after, recognize that it's not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	If the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that greater accidents will occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, so it is not advisable to put splints on; but instead, wrap with hard cloth, and tie.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is healing because of what you put on it, and if you apply ointment to healing wounds, just as ointment has tetter (or tetanus) and similar afflictions.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary to move the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is softened and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the limbs be covered in such a way that the wound heals quickly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day they trespass and it cannot heal but re-open with bleeding, see if there are small pieces of bone, because you must treat the wound with care, and remove all these unwanted things that make this pain come.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if an abscess comes to the joint, or another kind of corruption, it is fitting that you cure it, according to what he writes in his book previously.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opens on the limb, like the bone of the shoulder or arm, and other large member bones, do not treat it yourself, because many times death comes from it, but let it heal until it gets well; perhaps it will pass through it after twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound if you can, otherwise leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of burns that come from the fire
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They come many times after the health of the wound, especially when it is near the joint, and behold what kind of thing is seen in the member; and by chance, the limbs do not take their proper shape.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then take care of the wound: if it is fresh, then administer medicinal medicines such as aloes, incense, and mirror, and vinegar, and other similar things; and when you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with medicinal wine or with a lot of oil, or with ash, and place them on the wound in suppositories, and tie it well, and do not untie it for days; and then remove it, and repeat another one until the nodules are removed; or you apply a piece of plaster well made; because the properties of the plaster so that it removes all inflammation from the members; and if the nodules have been converted into hardness like stone, and it is needed to be removed, so after the eighth day, and make the swelling apparent; or take away any razor, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	One weak member after the guard
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the break of the bone is restored and stays after the weak members are set in place, but due to many reasons: because one was too tightly bound and not as tightly bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the new movements could not come to the limb; or because of multiple arrow insertions; or because of too great movements, neither in its hour nor otherwise; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you will make the patient eat, and make its body pliable, until there are no more swellings in it; then administer a bath, and give it joy and delight. After that, put poultices on the limb, so that the poultice attracts great swelling to the member, and the arrow shoots out frequently with water, until the swelling comes to an end, and returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb is twisted after the health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	If the limb is twisted after healing, and the bone breaks open, and the form of the limb is distorted, there is no cure for its natural condition: do not believe false rumors that say we must break the limb anew; and many have done this in our land, and this treatment is reprehensible, and it comes to great harm, and sometimes death. For if there are knots and torture still fresh, it is best to let them be softened by warm water, or to cook herbs that soften like violets, and roots, and mallow, and similar things; and to apply the softening medicine, as aqua calida has done, and take the muscillagine of violets, and mix it with fat of geline or olive of samient, and let it be softened on it; or take figs greasy, and grind them with flour of rye, and similar medicines that ease the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the joint is dislocated due to continuous friction and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And so move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted turns are hardened and set like stone, and it needs to be opened with iron, if you think that covering just above the bone is best at the subtle incision lightly, then put a dressing and study on the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, if you want to now move the joint again with care.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, and by chance if he is set on his bed; because this does not allow him to be moved until the swelling subsides: many times have brought forth spasm and other pains; wherever it happens, when it comes to treating the patient, then let him rest, until the swellings cease; then apply a hot, salty water, and oil, then move the limb lightly, and cure each member as the cure will come in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the physicians for treating dislocations of the shoulders with three fingers.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It has happened that the jaws have become dislocated and swollen inside, and there are two kinds of dislocations: either they have a little piece of bone loose in their joint, and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated and hanging down towards the chin, and block the saliva from the mouth so it cannot be held in, nor can the mouth be closed, and the tongue is driven out with the speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, so too does the movement repeat itself according to its disposition.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it hastily, and do not delay; and in such a manner that the ministers apply the chief of the patient, and give him some powder from one of his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and with the other two fingers they are held apart, to make equal; and instruct the patient to relax his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he gives it equal, so that it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns after being stiff, especially if they are both mandibles together, apply hot water and oil, until it relaxes lightly; do not delay in setting it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with softened meat, then put up moist cloths in cerote made from oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft ligaments; and let the patient sleep on their back, and their limbs should be between two cushions, so that it does not move neither left nor right, neither does force itself to strain, but takes lightly meat, until the pains are gone, and the mandibles are closed; and then take what they want lightly, and do not work hard to open the mouth to eat and drink, until the mandibles are well closed and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be returned to their place in an hour, and are not converted to their own, then it comes with fever and sweating accustomed, and by chance, vomiting from the belly, and by chance, vomiting clear.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is death; and many times have those who have had this died in seven days.
de la forcelle	of the arm.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The arm cannot be dislocated from the breastbone inside and at the elbow, and it is never dislocated without great pain, and one can feel this always.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And restoration is that the patient must lie on his back until his swelling subsides, and then extend his arms; and then press down with his hands to his palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and bandage, and bind it; and the shoulder joint which is towards the back cannot be dislocated if not; unless again, and if it becomes dislocated once, one must reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and bind it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and so also are restored the joints of the back, when they are set in their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways the shoulder joint is dislocated: 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens to some men that percussion or crushing, and inflating the shoulder area of an abscess, and thinks it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you examine it, as long as you are certain; and then start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations occur when they are displaced downwards towards the shoulder joint, and you will find a difference between the diseased and healthy shoulders, and you will find a manifest difference; and you will find a depression at the top of the shoulder, and under the shoulder, the top of the shoulder just like before; and it cannot be returned to its original position or moved from any movement; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you will find it manifestly in the shoulder joint; and this type of dislocation is not hard to return when it is new, or if the patient is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And thus the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient above, then put the poultice below the bone, and lift the joint towards the healthy limb; and the ministers lift the hand and extend it upwards, since they place it underneath; if this happens soon.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said four times the previous days, so it is fitting that the patient be bathed in hot water; and he be anointed with a mollifying and soothing substance, like a decoction of altee, fenugrec, and malliolote in hot water, and also anoint him. Then put the patient on his back, and place a cloth of equal thickness neither too soft nor too hard under the bone, then put some linen over the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder properly, and treat the hand of the patient; and one other minister lifts the head of the patient if it does not move downwards; this shoulder will return all now, and you should see if he re-dislocates according to this manner: and thus you must make him be present with one man who is greater than the patient; and stand directly towards his side, and pour hot water onto the shoulder of the patient from under the bone, and lift the bone upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; and one other minister treats the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, so they are weighed with no heavy thing, and the dislocation comes back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And to fix it in another way: and it's like this - they put a long iron rod into the ground, whose joint is also level as a plow, neither too big nor too small; then it's placed under the patient, but only if they have soft skin above, and the patient has their arm bent back towards the stick; then the hand is stretched down from the other side in this way, and the joint returns to its place quickly; and if she does not return for all these things that we have said, do this cure: take a rod of two arms' length and four feet wide, whose head has an opening enough to fit into deep beneath the axles, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Instruct the patient to lie under the head with a cloth wrapped around it, so that the injury may not be touched by the patient, then place it beneath the wound of the patient; and stretch out one arm over the fist of the long one, and bind the assistant above the fist, and the arm at the top of the hand, then place the arm above the bend of an inch-long sleeve, and so extend the hands down, and leave the body hanging from another part: the joint is now fixed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is thus fixed, in any manner whatsoever, it is necessary that you put down the wound with a spear of wool equal, then apply the plaster made of powdered flour of the mill, with incense and wolf fat, on all the shoulder and back; then pull out from below the wound immediately, and turn the bandage upon the plaster, and embrace the hand on its neck, so that the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It is fitting that he mends the bone little by little, until the members are comfortable, because it will heal faster; and then he will mend more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is cured.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is swollen from moisture that has come upon it, or from another cause, it is fitting to administer cauterization three times, as with the cauterization tool in front of or on the cauterizing instrument.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all that, and after seven days the joint does not hold, nor can any arm be lifted upwards, then it seems that the nerves at the shoulder of the neck have been struck, stretched, or softened; and it seems that the joint has never returned to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The injury that is done to the shoulder joint and the knee, or behind, if it is made by force and stretching of hands, and it serves another wound; and treat until he becomes whole.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes greyness to the limb and late movement, then use the patient many times in baths until the greyness is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder cut
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Says that the joint of the shoulder is displaced at points, and returns to points; and if it has been displaced in all directions, and itself in front and behind, for dislocations do not come back, because one sees them well and feels them well; and displaces according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick with the healthy one, so you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For when the joint is swollen, and cannot flex the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is therefore necessary to reset it again so that the abscess comes out, because if an abscess comes out, then it will cause more pain in resetting; and by chance, it cannot be reset completely, especially when it is at the back; this is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance someone may die.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And if restoration is possible, when it can be reset as such that one can reset it, then you extend its hand to both of your hands; and its arms should spread out, and the fingers relaxed according to the shape of the hand, in front and behind, and press the joint into its sockets or at the base of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if a dislocation occurs, when he doubles his hand to his hand, and proud of the root of the palm, the wound is inflicted.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, administer great extension; and if two ministers stretch the arm, and two of them tie it with both hands, so that it does not move when extended; then turn the arm from each direction, after you have stretched a double cloth long and wide; and when the joint aligns itself with the joint, apply oil to ease the joint, then bend the joint tightly, until it becomes straight again; and when it is in its place, put on plastered binding with wool of yew, form the strain, and turn the arm towards the back of the patient, and leave it for some days, then set it free.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firm in its place, then release the ligament and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then reapply the plaster and the ligament, and let it be for some days, until it is firmly set; then release.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint is put back in place and it becomes stiff, then bathe him well and massage him, and press until he is relaxed; or you apply a fatty mutton shank to the joint, let it be for one day and night, then remove the bone, and let him enter into the bath; and when he sweats, then rub the joint temperately, put on the fatty mutton shank again, and then enter into the bath; and do this twice or three times until he is healed; and if you see, apply fien (fennel) to moist and hot water with lard, and strain it; then it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	Dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint in the hand is dislocated and it heals quickly, like all the others. It is recommended to bring it back to its place immediately, in the same hole where it was dislocated, so that the swelling goes down or the abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And if you bring it back in that way, then place the diseased hand on a board and stretch out the fingers of the hand, and straighten the wrist, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pound it till it comes to life. Always, look to see if it is well set; afterwards, put the patient's back against a board at extension and at bringing back.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's back against a board and straighten his fingers on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	She now returns, is it not, if the strained flesh calms the swelling of the abscess, and she leaves it so that the sense begins again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put her back in place after some days, the joint will remain twisted; and there is no remedy for the patient other than that she will be unable to move at all, nor can any strain be relieved from anything: thus see that the nerves are bruised, or the arteries; if there is no other cause except straining with cautery of the joints, and perhaps it will bring about no other cure.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the dressing on top of what we have said, then apply the strain and leave it for a day, then remove and leave as before.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move well, and there is no great affliction, then apply the hot water to the affected area, and rub it so that he may recover.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	They are not dislocated at both parts of the hand, sometimes on one side of the palm or on the belly; thus they are, and to set the dislocation in your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the affected hand, and direct it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for two days, and then put it equal to that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and the bandage of one day, and set it moving, and bind it as before; and do so frequently, until it tightens, and just as I told you, and setting it loose, and making it move, and binding again; and do this, whenever they are dislocated on another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	A dislocation of the shoulder bone at the back of the body
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder bone or the collarbone is dislocated, or if there are many dislocations and no cure, for the dead come to claim the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And if the signs are that the dislocation cannot be contained by will, nor held together, and many times a limb is softened or both shoulders or both arms are affected, and often the shoulder bone is dislocated in four parts; that one which is dislocated at the back is called "gilbositez": the doctor should treat so that if gilbositez has come from childhood, no cure or healing for the whole body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from a fall or impact, or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment were done with great words, without much benefit; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I dis that in the gout that comes to the foot in front, no treatment is available; and also that which comes directly into two sides, and cannot be cured with fire unless it is specifically located on the back, as I said; and that the patient should be stretched out on their face in one position, and have a bandage around them so they do not bleed; then insert one pin into the head in the earth, and another at the knee, and tie a rope behind the legs of the sick person, and another at the hams, and knees, and ankles; and two servants will check the ropes, one at the head and the other at the knee, between the two pins; and they should be well closed, like we have said, and the pins placed so as to fit, with the hands of the mire on the stake, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, so take a table of three arms long, and lean on it from above the pain, and let the patient be beside him, and pour the head of the table below the pain, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and place the mires on his feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see this, do it as a turnip that turns towards one's hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then you stick two stakes on the top of the patient's arm of great size, and above his feet, two others, and between each stake a space of an inch from above and below; and between them there should be one stake pierced or the turnip turns, and they are firmly grounded so that they do not move; and between the two stakes there should be two more stakes of an inch in length to make the turnip turn, because of the ties that turn; and after tying the tie that is between the joints on the turnip towards the top, and the other tie towards his feet on the other turnip, and each master makes their turnip turn along the entire joint, and the masters put the spine in an even position as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef,
des dislocations de la hainche	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Those who have the shoulder joints and those of the elbow come only from dislocations, not from anything else; and the joint of the elbow is misaligned in four parts: inside and outside, and before and behind; and it is worse inside than outside, and less so before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of dislocations inside is that when you join the sick leg to the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knees are looser than those of the healthy person, and cannot double their knee movement over the heat; and is the swelling that is near the inflamed joint, because the head of the scaphoid bone comes into contact.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it happens on the foredoom, so is that this accident is contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it happens on the foredoom, so is that he stands well with his leg according to completion; all his joints are straight without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot do so before, and holds back his urine, and inflates his groin, and when he walks, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens behind, so is that he cannot spread his knees, nor bend them, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the femur is displaced below the lower ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this sign of dislocation are that you should return to the place where the dislocation is ancient, and it stays according to its disposition, if there is no cure; and it does not seem necessary that he has assumed.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	In those where the dislocation is fresh, and it's of four kinds, so hasten that you return the joint, and push it inside and forth, and the limb move at right hand and left; by chance if it comes back, and has no other need for a different treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return in this manner, so it is fitting that you have a strong man come, and fasten the leg with two hands, or tie one to the groin; and another kind of minister extends his hand above in such a way as he presses his hands below his thighs, then tightens a strong cord on his crotch; and another ties up the head with a rope; and extend them upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and remains.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common among four types, and if a dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this is not the case, it is advisable to apply treatment to its appearance When dislocations are at the shoulder joints, it is advisable that you lift the patient up on their sound side, then tie them on the root of the arm, and let them who is below the angle, then stretch the tying upwards towards the angle and towards the elbow; then take other assistants and wrap the swollen limb tightly around the injured arm, and stretch it outwards in a circular form: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, it is advisable to tie the two feet and the two knees of the sick person together with a strong rope soft on the two heels, and on the two knees, so that the diseased leg is extended twice as much as the others; then hang them above the head of a beam, and above the ground for two long arms; then command one assistant to embrace the head of the bone, and let other assistants be suspended with the patient, who will embrace and form the bone, because the joint returns soon instantly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations occur in their proper place, then instruct the patient as we have said to those who have gout, and remove the gall from the diseased leg properly, and from the skin; then apply two stitches, one on the head and one on another part of the pie; then put a stitch between the knees of the diseased person in the shape; and plant moist cloth around it so that he does not bleed, then stretch out each of these ministers to him, and place the mallet in his hand with equal balance to his dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	But if it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place on the side of the table, and press as we have said in the gout, and instruct the patient on the healthy coast.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	When the dislocation is in front of it, so as to extend the ill limb immediately, and according to what I have said; and place the mirror on its pain above the anguine (bad) limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch out towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in front of it, do not extend the ill limb immediately, nor raise it up on the ground, but rather as if it had been set straight out before, as we have said regarding lying down on two hanches; and so with its face turned up, and the ligature stretched out as we have said before, and one must press firmly onto the joint at the table; and when the patient extends their legs, they will be even; then add wooden splints, and apply the plaster, and a strained bandage, so that the hunch does not move; and if it rests for three days or four, then it is released, and the plaster is applied again; and if you see that they are straightened, as before, then apply the strain again, for three days; and then release it, and let it walk pleasantly, until the limbs become comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the displacement of the joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward; but not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his knee to his groin, and if he cannot do so, it means he is dislocated; and the restoration for all these is that you sit the patient upright, and extend his knee as much as possible, and put your back against his face, and place his foot on your feet; then take hold of his knees in your palms, and press between them, then bend both sides of the knee together; and another minister extends his foot, until the joint returns to its place, and it is a sign that he can bend his knee again lightly; and put a plaster on, and let him rest with his knee straight for three days or four, then release him, and do not trouble the patient further, as long as the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not at all, then it is necessary to extend them very strongly, just as we said in the treatment of gout, until they become healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of foot dislocations
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The feet are sometimes swollen and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And if the signs are that the ankle is swollen and then partly dislocated, and if it is pulled forward before the part where it is dislocated: the remedies are lighter, and one should extend it lightly with the hands when it is only swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary to seat the patient upright, and to fasten him tightly with his hands on the thigh, above the ankle; then take hold of the leg with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and pour water into the top of the foot thoroughly; and do this twice, as we have said, pouring and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, if it recurs again, because it will return; and if it cannot return thus, you should make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and drive the splint firmly into the ground between his knees, and tie a bandage around him so that he does not bleed; then fasten the ministers to the knee, and other ministers extend the foot to his hands or to the ligature, so that it is stretched above the neck of the foot; then stretch each of these ministers equally, and the splint should be firmly inserted between the knees of the patient to hold him when stretching; then put the linen bandage equal to the dislocation on his hands, and other ministers fasten the sound leg downwards, so that the dislocation returns suddenly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	Et quant elle iert à point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, and puts the plaster and bandages on top of it,
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes up, so that it is healing, then you must calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is sound.
des dois	From two.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two bones are dislocated, then they should be extended as much as possible with work, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocations are in any part of the back and foot, then they should be done so that you sit the patient on a hard or smooth surface. Put your foot under whatever part of these joints is open, and press with your foot firmly, until it sets; and when it is set, and nothing opens up again, put some cloth on the sole of the foot a second time over two fingers, then firm it again, and let it stay for three days, then release it; and make him rest, until he is sound.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Injury and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When an injury comes with a dislocation, and you try to restore it, many patients die. Do not be presumptuous in your treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and delay things, do not force them. Use gentle methods at first, opening incisions carefully, and let the patient fall into God's hands, if you see no hope of recovery. When you see hope, then straighten the member now as much as possible, so that the incision heals quickly; when the limb is in its place, treat with soothing incisions, and heal the wound, as it should be done, with dried ointments; and if there is a break and small bones are broken, set them, and do what we have said for simple diseases; and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, because that will bring you no profit, but according to your Creator's wisdom, and the skill with which you arm yourself and your body.
Amen	Amen
