Chapter 43.
On the incision of the appendage of the abscess occurring in the throat.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
And this is the written account of their discourse.
But in men having injury, it is appropriate to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis, as it is not beneficial since all the veins and the main vessels of the patient are there.
But in those who have cauterized abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the trachea, it is appropriate to use the incision of the epiglottis to avoid the destruction caused by perforation.
So, when we want this, we incise the epiglottis below three circles of the circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small incision across the width at the point between two circles by amount, so that the incision is in the membrane, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for incision, because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels there are distant.
And if the physician is fearful, it is appropriate then to extend the skin of the throat with a hook, and then slit the skin until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to.
And then incise the membrane as we have recounted; and it is indicated for the incision of the channel by the phlegm that comes out of it along with what is ruptured and by the loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Then when the time has passed in which perforation is feared, join the two lips of the wound’s skin, and suture it alone without the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that generate flesh until it is healed.
And Albucasis said that the summary of the discourse we have recounted is nothing but that you see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the patient's throat, and the patient is approaching death, and the breath is interrupted, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound site for some respiration, and be saved from death.
And for this, they ordered to leave the wound open until the malignancy of the illness is consumed; and the malignancy is for three days; and then they ordered to suture the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
And what I have seen myself, is that a servant took a knife and put it in her throat and incised with it a part of the windpipe, and I was called for the treatment of it, and I found the patient as though she were dead, and I uncovered the wound and found the blood which had come out of the wound little by little.
Then I was assured that she had not incised a vein or artery, and the air was coming out of the wound, and I treated it until it was healed.
And nothing happened to the servant except hoarseness in the voice, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
And now I say that in the incision of the epiglottis there is no fear.
