Of cauterization for head pain due to coldness and humidity.
The first chapter.
This cauterization helps with humidity and coldness on the brain, which are due to two causes, namely soda and the abundance of rheumatic flow called catarrh, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, excessive sleep, and pain of the teeth and throat, and generally any disease that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, sudden stroke, and similar diseases.
The method of this cauterization is this: firstly, you command the patient to evacuate the head with purgative medicine, cleaning it for three or four nights, according to the patient's strength, age, and habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him sit between your hands on a square bench and place his hands on his chest.
Then place the edge of your palm near the well above the bridge of the nose between his eyes.
However, when the middle of your finger locates the spot, mark that place with a probe, and then ignite the olive cautery iron, the form of which is:
And then place it on the marked spot with the probe, in such a way that it descends, with your hand gradually applying pressure, and you rotate it.
Then lightly lift your hand and check the spot, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, as much as a grain of wheat, then lift your hand, and if not, return with the iron or another iron, if it has cooled, until the bone is visible as I have told you.
Then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then place cotton soaked in vinegar over it and leave it until the scab from the burn is destroyed.
Then treat the spot with tetraderm ointment until it is healed.
And some have said that as long as the wound remains open, it expels the humor better, making it more beneficial.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's surface is burnt.
Then scrape off the burnt part of the bone and treat it.
Others have said that with the cautery, it should reach the marrow, pressing strongly on the bone until it falls, and this is the form of the minor alphecati:
And they believe that from that spot the vapors of the head are expelled.
The wound should be kept open for a long time, and then be treated until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two kinds of cauterization have not been seen at all, except in some men as a means of precaution; and leave that, in my view, it is better for health, as it is; because the head is weakened by the breaking of its continuity as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of fragile nature.
And the first type of cauterization is safer and better in my view; use that one and work with that for health.
