Of cauterization with fire and sharp medicine and a reminder of the operation.
With this begins the treatise of the entire book.
It is necessary for me to speak about the qualities of the benefits of that cauterization and its harms, and in which constitution cauterization is prohibited.
Thus I say that the discourse on the quality of the benefits of cauterization and its harms is a long and detailed discussion, subtle through science, and a hidden secret; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed on it, and for me, a small portion of their discourses suffices, fearing prolongation.
Therefore I say that cauterization benefits any constitution universally which has or lacks matter, except for two constitutions, which are hot constitutions without matter.
In the hot and dry constitution with matter they disagreed; for some said that cauterization is beneficial for it, while others said the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for an illness which is by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is unsuitable for a hot and dry illness to be healed by something that is hot and dry.
And he who said the opposite of that said that by cauterization benefit is made in any hot and dry illness that comes in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its moistures to the constitution of fire, you find the body of man cold.
And I say through the discourse of that one, that I have already discovered this in some experiments.
However, it is not appropriate for someone who is not already experienced and practiced in the chapter of cauterization through thorough exercise to come upon this, and who has not known the diversity of the constitutions of men and the disposition of the diseases in themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and the time span of those.
But in the other constitutions, there is no fear for you, especially in cold and moist illnesses, for all the doctors have agreed on those, and have not disagreed on the benefit of cauterization in those.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and its goodness, as opposed to cauterization with burning medicine, is that fire is simple, whose action does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and does not harm the other member adjacent to it except with little harm.
But the action of burning medicine reaches that in the members which are distant from it, and very quickly brings to the member a disease of difficult healing and very quickly seen.
But the fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except to remove excess. And it is already known to us by experiment and by long service of study in the art on the truth of the causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of the discourse. And if it were not that it is not read in my book, in this I would pause to you a hidden secret with fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of its expulsion by which it expels diseases, with a demonstrative philosophical discourse, which would be quickened in your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is suitable to do cauterization and they place the best time in spring.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which is achieved with cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strong and urgent, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that from those will come a malignancy, which is greater than the small harm entering from the time.
And this does not fall into your minds, oh sons, this is not thought by anyone except the common people and foolish doctors, that is, that the disease healed by cauterization does not recur all the time, and they place that as a result.
And the cause is not as they think because of this, because cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the constitution and dries the moistures which are the cause for the pains to come.
But cauterization surpasses medicine by the swiftness of its power and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the disease will return at some hour of the time, according to the constitution of the patient and the location of his disease, and the strength of it, and that which is prepared in his body from the accumulation of excesses in it, and that which has come to it in his acquisition of foods and similar causes; unless the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few excesses and moistures, like the cauterization of a tooth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in it that pain will not return, but this happens rarely.
And the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true saying, not for what they understand in it, because they believe that it is not a cure that benefits with medicine nor with another cause except cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is not except when we administer the methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and near the end of the cause one administers cauterization, and it benefits that.
And then from here it falls that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and the many foolish doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cauterization does not become rough, though this is not absolutely true, for I have already tested this and found that it does not do this except in some bodies and not in others, and cauterization with it is good and better than with iron as they said; but however, when you make cauterization with fire with gold, it is not clear to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity you want due to the toughness of the gold, and because it is prepared to receive cold; and if you apply ignition on it, the gold melts by the fire, and some layers fall into the fire, by which the artificer falls due to the occupation with it.
And therefore cauterization with iron is done by us more easily and more suitably to the correctness of the operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have arranged them from the head to the feet, so that I might alleviate the demand by giving what is needed.
