First chapter.
On the treatment of water which is contained in the heads of children.
Know that this illness often occurs in children during childbirth or when the nurse squeezes the child's head too tightly.
And sometimes it happens for an unknown hidden reason.
But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those I saw, death followed quickly, and so it seemed to me a neglected task in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was so enlarged that he could not hold it up due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until he died.
And this moisture is either collected between the scalp and the bone, or it is collected under the bone above the brain.
For the operation in that case, if the moisture is between the scalp and the bone and the swelling is small, then it is necessary to cut in the middle of the head with a fissure in the width, and the length of the fissure should be about two nuts so that the moisture can flow, and this is the shape of the incision:
And if the moisture is more increased and the swelling is larger, then there are two fissures in this manner:
And if the moisture is under the bone, a sign of it is that you see the seams of the head open in all parts and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand at the inner parts, and this is not hidden from you.
It is necessary to cut in the middle of the head with three fissures in this manner:
and near the incision, extract all the moisture; and then tighten the fissures with cloths and sponges; and then anoint the area with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with tentacles and ointments, and bind the head with equal pressure; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the part is strengthened and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which considers where the swelling and collection of water appear, for sometimes it is more in the back, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left; and then attend to the incision where the swelling and collection of water appear, and do this as best as possible.
And observe not to cut the artery, lest there be a flow of blood and the patient die from that flow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.
