On the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows in the incision of them.
Hemorrhoids are in two ways, for they are either between the anus looking like coals, or as if they are like clusters of grapes.
And of those some are small and some large, and blood flows from them continuously and some are single, and there are many, and they are outside the anus, and at its edges.
But those that are outside the anus are mostly due to little moisture, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood with continuous discomfort, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of those that are inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to sit and strain until the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Then you quickly suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nail, and then cut them towards their roots.
But if the hooks do not hold them because of their moisture and softness, then take them with a rough cloth or cotton or wool blanket, and pull them out with your fingers, and then cut them and sprinkle on them some hot powders near the incision, so that they act on them in place of cautery; or cauterize them as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing.
And then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not respond to evacuation, then use a small biting enema on the patient, and wash with it what is in the anus so that it responds to evacuation lightly when the patient strains.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the treatment of them is easier, and it is that you take them with your nail, or take them with a hook, and cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
And for the one who dislikes incision, you should administer suturing of them in this manner: take a thread wrapped and insert it into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make it penetrate with the needle at the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread in the lower part of the needle, and this transversely; and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong tie, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
And do this to all, and leave one of them and do not sew it, so that the excess blood runs from it.
And then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or plaster; and place it over the anus and instruct the patient to rest.
And then leave it until it falls; and when it has fallen, treat it with ointments or with other treatment until it is healed.
On the treatment of fistulas.
Many times it happens due to the drying of a crack or the natural contraction.
And when they are old and do not heal with that medicine, then you must scrape them with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they are made moist and remove the uppermost scab, which prevents them from healing; and then treat them until they are healed.
Then you remove them more vigorously than the first time until much blood flows and they are excoriated; and then treat them until they are healed.
