On the forms of the instruments necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of the screw with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of the screw in which the books are joined, in which there are two screws at the ends of two rods.
However, this screw must be more delicate in structure, and be made of ebony or boxwood.
And the width of each rod should be about two fingers, and the edge of each about one finger, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two rods are two joints of the same wood that are already fixed, whose length is half a palm and a little more, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that she can be opened with them when you turn the two prescribed screws.
Another similar form, more delicate and lighter:
Should be made of ebony or boxwood in the likeness of forceps.
But at the end of it, there are two additions as usual, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with them, then you make the woman lie on the bed with her legs hanging, exposing what is between her thighs.
Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with scissors equally according to the amount you want of the opening of the mother until the midwife does what you want.
The form of the screw that the ancients called:
Form of the pusher with which the fetus is pushed:
Form of the crusher with which the large head is crushed
And it is similar to forceps which have teeth at the end, as usual, and sometimes it is made long like forceps in this shape, as usual, which have teeth like saw teeth with which it is cut and crushed.
Form of a small crusher:
Form of a hook with one spine:
Form of a hook with two spines:
Form of forceps with saw teeth with which the fetus's head is crushed:
Form of a spatula with two ends with which the head is cut off:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and the more the species of them are multiplied and prepared by the craftsmen, the easier their operation and the more valuable they become for men.
And you do not work with those instruments unless you are well-prepared, because the necessity of them is inescapable.
