Chapter 49.
On the incision of abscesses that occur due to an artery or a vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the skin over it is consolidated, then many times an abscess occurs. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: when the abscess is due to an artery, it is long, aggregated in the body's depth; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a sort of creaking.
And the one caused by a vein is round on the body's surface.
And incision on this abscess is an error, especially on those under the armpits, in the groins, on the neck, and in many places on the body; and it is very serious, so it is necessary to avoid treating it with iron, and the one that is on the extremities, or on the head, must be avoided.
But for the one caused by the swelling of the artery’s orifice, make an incision in the skin lengthwise; then open the incision with hooks and near the artery, and free it from the membranes until it is uncovered.
Then place a needle over it and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, — a method I showed you in the extraction of two arteries in the temples.
Then press the place between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the blood is expelled, and the abscess is dissolved.
Then apply a treatment to where there is decay until the ligatures fall off; and then treat it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to a vein, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess as you can with the skin, and then insert a needle below the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and it should have a double thread so you can pull it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligature as I told you in the ligature of the uvula in two parts with two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle under the whole abscess along the first needle’s incision, and tighten your threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle of it until what is in it comes out, then you incise the excess skin, and leave what is tied.
Then place a powder on it that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then apply the treatment made with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
