Chapter 54:
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, the types of dropsy from water, and the signs of each type, and their treatment with medicines.
And the one that is treated with iron is only the type of ascites, and iron is not used for the type of tympanites or the type of anasarca, for it is fatal.
And when you have treated this type of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not work, then consider, for if the patient has already acquired weakness, or has another illness besides dropsy, such as a cough or belly condition and similar to these, then avoid treating him with iron, for there is fear in that.
But if you see the patient with abundant strength, and he has no other illness but dropsy, and is not a child or elderly, then the manner of operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and the assistant presses his belly with his hand, pushing the water to the lower part of the abdomen, and then take a sharp spatula in this shape:
let it be long with two sharp parts, with a sharp tip like a spatula; but it should have some small brevity, so that in operation with it you do not pass into the intestine and injure it.
Then consider if the dropsy is from the intestines, for then you should move your incision away from the navel by the amount of three fingers towards the lower parts, in the direction of the pubic region.
But if the dropsy is from a liver disease, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if it is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
And do not make your incision on the side where the patient prefers to lie, so that the superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
Then perforate the whole skin with the instrument, and insert it into that incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the skin and the membrane, and peel it off; to the amount of a nail or around that.
Then perforate the membrane until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is the place of the water.
Then extract it and insert an instrument in this shape:
it is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or light bronze, at the lowest part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is incised in the manner of a feather, as you sometimes see:
And at the uppermost end of it is a small ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, it then descends over the instrument, then evacuate the water in half the quantity at a time, for if you evacuate more than is appropriate at once, the patient may die quickly from a resolution of his animal spirit, or he may faint which approaches death.
But evacuate it according to the quantity of his strength and as the patient's pulse and condition indicate to you his strength and wellness.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water which is retained by the skin which closes the hole that you made on the membrane as described.
Then repeat the use of the instrument the next day if you see the patient tolerating it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for a few days with caution, and avoid error until only a little water remains.
But if you fear for the patient, and you leave a large quantity of water, then treat him with burial in warm sand, and much sweating in the bath, and exposure to the sun for a long time; and treat him with desiccative medicines until he is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, the spleen, and the liver near the water extraction site, as I have explained in the preceding section.
