Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy from which the usual places to perform it are as follows: two pulsating veins near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins in the temples; two veins in the tear ducts of the eyes called aspicientz; a vein in the middle of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins at the neck; two veins in the upper lip; two veins in the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic —; and two veins under the tongue.
But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five: One of these is the cephalic vein, which is on the outer side; and people call it "the head vein," also known as the middle vein, composed of a branch of the basilic vein and another branch of the cephalic vein; people call this "the vein of the whole body," and the basilic vein is on the inner side, known as “citillar,” called by common people "the vein of the belly"; the funis of the arm, located over the elbow, is the one where phlebotomy is performed, appearing over the pulse by clear manifestation; and salvatella, which is the vein between the ring finger and the little finger, located in two branches.
In the foot and leg, there are three veins; one is under the curve of the knee on the outer side; the second is the saphenous vein, located under the leg on the inner side; and the sciatic vein, located under the leg on the outer side; in the leg, there are other veins similar to these.
The benefit of the veins near the ears is for old catarrhs and migraines and scurf and old head ulcers.
The method of bleeding these veins is as I tell you: shave the head of the patient, and rub the back of the patient's head where both veins are with a large cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a band until the two veins and their places appear near the ears at two pressed places on the head; and find them with your finger, and if you feel their pulse with your finger, mark the spot with a probe.
Then take the lancet knife, which is for incision, and insert it under the vein in the skin until the phlebotomy reaches the bone.
Then lift your hand with the vein and the skin upwards and incise the vein with an incision knife.
And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers joined or around that; and let as much blood flow out as you want.
Then press it with powders and leave it until it is healed.
And it is already mentioned at the beginning of the book the incision of these and their cauterization.
But for the two arterial veins in the temples, the benefit of phlebotomy is for chronic and severe migraines, persistent ophthalmia, and acute excessive discharges from the eyes.
And the method to phlebotomize them is as I tell you: have the patient tighten their neck greatly until the two veins appear by sensation through clear manifestation and their pulse is felt under your finger; then mark with a probe.
Then lift the skin above the vein upwards with your index finger, insert the incision phlebotomy tool underneath, lift the vein upwards; and incise it as you did with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount you need.
Then loosen the patient's constriction, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton and powders on it and press it tightly, and leave it until it is healed.
And the remembrance of them, and their incision, and the extraction is already mentioned at the beginning of the book.
And thus the benefit of phlebotomy of the forehead vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for chronic facial diseases and migraines and redness and foul ulcers.
And the method of phlebotomy there is as I tell you; that is, the patient tightens their neck with a band until the vein appears; then take the instrument called fossori of which this is its form:
Place the prominent point which is at the head of the fossori on that vein and strike it with a hammer or other object in that manner, and let the blood flow as much as you want; then loosen the patient's constriction and press it until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide phlebotomy tool, but the phlebotomy tool should not be of sharp extremity like the other phlebotomy tools, rather it should be of wide extremity, and phlebotomize it transversely, because the bone is close and it would easily break the phlebotomy tool if it is fine.
But the benefit of the two veins in the tear ducts of both eyes is for scab in the eyes, redness, and inflammation in the eyes, and facial diseases.
And the method of phlebotomy is that the patient tightens their neck with a band, then phlebotomize those, and you stand over the patient's head.
And perform the phlebotomy transversely a little with a small phlebotomy tool, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the phlebotomy tool is fine, its extremity will break easily.
And then let the blood flow as much as you need, place cotton on them, and press them for one night, and then loosen them.
But the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and sudden severe fever, facial diseases, migraines, and redness that occur on the face, especially when chronic.
And the method of phlebotomy there is that the patient tightens their neck and you hold their nose with your left hand, take the fine long phlebotomy tool and insert it in the middle of the nose tip straightly, because the vein does not appear by sensation there, and because the blood starts to flow immediately.
You should gradually withdraw your hand with the phlebotomy tool and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, because it heals quickly.
But the benefit of phlebotomy of the two guidegui veins is for nasal constriction, the onset of leprosy, many diseases, impetigo, and corrosive ulcers like herpes.
And the method of phlebotomy for those is that the patient tightens below each vein in their neck with a band; the practitioner should stand over the patient's head, and the patient should sit on a chair.
Then phlebotomize the vein lengthwise with a wide phlebotomy tool little by little; then extract blood in a moderate amount or according to what is necessary for that; then do the same with the other vein.
Then loosen the band and press the two veins with moderate pressure so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it until the morning because the wound is healed.
And the benefit of phlebotomy of the algelic veins is for small abscesses and pustules of the mouth, gum decay, bad ulcers, and fissures, and bad ulcers in the nose and its surrounding area.
And the method of phlebotomy for those is that you make the patient sit in front of you, tighten their neck with a band, then turn their lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left side; and the identification of each is by the blackness of each of both, and more so because around them are small black veins; then incise each with an incision tool.
But if you have doubt, and do not know which one it is, then you should proceed to incise the largest of those, and the most apparent of those.
And do the same with the two veins in the upper lips.
But it is more common to incise the two veins in the lower lip.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the two veins under the tongue is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for inflammations in the throat, diseases of the uvula, and mouth diseases.
And the method of phlebotomizing those is that you hold the patient between your hands facing the sun, lift their tongue, and look under the tongue, from one side to the other, and the color of each is leaning towards blackness.
And then phlebotomize each; and be careful not to keep your hand too long in phlebotomizing those, because there are arteries underneath them.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are the ones where blood usually flows in all men, and their phlebotomy is done in two ways, either puncture with the myrtle or olive phlebotomy tool with a declining subtlety; or cut with a knife-like phlebotomy tool, called alnessil, and this is its form:
And this alnessil is suitable for cutting and comes in wide and narrow varieties according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Form of the myrtle phlebotomy tool:
it is wide like some, and suitable for opening concave veins that are visibly large, and for those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this is the form of the olive phlebotomy tool:
And this phlebotomy tool is narrower and has a finer tip, and is suitable for phlebotomy of fine veins that contain fine, yellowish blood.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it extracts the blood from the diseases that are below the throat and neck, and from what follows to the chest and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to be very careful and cautious because there is an artery underneath, and if he makes a mistake and hits the artery with the phlebotomy tool, it will cause blood flow, so he should not phlebotomize it with a puncturing tool, but rather cut with the alnessil.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then you should leave it and move to another, or look for one of its branches; or phlebotomize in the place at the end of the arm, because it is visible; and cut it with the alnessil phlebotomy tool as we have said.
But if you want to perform the phlebotomy yourself, then you should first tighten the arm and find the pulse point, then mark it with ink; and then bind the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision with the alnessil phlebotomy tool as we have said; and be careful not to let the cut fall in the area of the artery.
And when you see, while tightening the binding, swelling in the place you marked with ink, that swelling is from the artery, and then you should avoid it.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy like the urine of a child, and the blood is thin and red, then you know it is arterial blood; and then you should quickly place your finger over it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood stops, because often it does, then you should bind the arm and leave it.
And protect the patient from movement, be cautious with him and do not disturb him for some days until it is healed.
But if the blood does not stop, and you see that you do not have the necessary medicine, then you cut the artery if it appears; because its end is constricted, and the blood is stopped; or you take the bark of pistachio, prepare it, take one half and press it on the vein with a descending tightness with a bandage and powders until the next day.
And then if the blood stops, good; if not, then treat it with what is previously mentioned about the powders that stop blood flow.
And stopping the blood there is difficult in many cases because of the small area of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
But the phlebotomy of the fusca vein benefits by extracting the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be cautious when performing phlebotomy on it, because there is a nerve underneath it; and if he punctures with the phlebotomy tool and hits the nerve, it will cause numbness, and its healing is difficult, and it may never heal completely. And this nerve is sometimes felt; and if it is hidden in some people and is thin and not visible, then you should place the phlebotomy tool with which you perform the incision with the alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your skill.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you make the vein longitudinally.
The benefit of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and is beneficial for diseases of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this one specifically, if you want to phlebotomize it, to use the olive or myrtle phlebotomy tool; because it is the safest of all veins, since there is no artery or nerve underneath it.
But nevertheless, it is necessary for you, in the phlebotomy, to make sure that you do not puncture the muscle head with the phlebotomy tool, and look for the lightest place, and do not harm it, if it is not found with the first percussion, perform the phlebotomy a few times over it.
But nevertheless, it often becomes inflamed in some people, when it is not phlebotomized with the first percussion, but this inflammation does not harm at all.
But the quality of the phlebotomy of that one and its accidents are many, in which you need to think about their correction.
The first thing you need to know is that phlebotomy is not administered except in the preservation of health and with the hope and caution of preventing diseases, and that phlebotomy should be done in one of the veins in the elbow, that is: cephalic, fusca, and basilic; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter after a meal, when there are signs of fullness.
And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or the first after three hours of the day have passed.
But phlebotomy that is administered, when it causes convenience and necessity, whether by night or by day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is necessary that a child is not phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman is not phlebotomized except from the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly are not phlebotomized who have already passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be phlebotomized in any manner, it is necessary to cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with a leon enema, if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw the impurities in the phlebotomy from the bowels, which are putrid, and do not harm the principal organs.
And patients with excessive nausea and hangover should not be phlebotomized, nor those recovering from illness or drunkenness until it has passed, nor those suffering from dropsy, and phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, and near bowel conditions, and near excessive coitus and work and exercise from fasting or vigils and any cause that weakens the strength, whether bodily or animal.
And also consider the thinning of humors before this if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And take a bath beforehand if no cause prohibits it, or exercise in some way so that the blood is thinned.
And perform the phlebotomy in the morning, that is, around the third hour, as we have said.
And make sure that the patient's peace is guarded on that day from all bad animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as excessive work, pain, coitus, and similar things.
And at their side, have present the things that men usually use with aromaticity and fragrance, and with balm and similar things according to the quantity possible.
And the phlebotomist should sit on a stool that is higher than the stool of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And then, extend their arm, and the phlebotomist should rub it with their hand two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it around twice.
And let the tightness be moderate, because if the tightness is not equal, or if it is too tight, it prevents the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, it prevents the proper flow of blood outward.
And after the tightening, the one who is to be phlebotomized should rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and become visible.
And then the phlebotomist should anoint the phlebotomy tool with a bit of old oil; and then place the index finger of the left hand on the vein, below the spot where the phlebotomy is to be done, so the vein moves slightly, and the tapping ceases because some veins act like a fleeing string towards the phlebotomy, and some are full of air and when you place the phlebotomy tool on them, they contract towards the tool, and the phlebotomist is deceived; and the tool does not open the vein, and if it does, the vein becomes narrow.
And therefore, the phlebotomist must be firm and diligent in all these matters.
And then place the phlebotomy tool, but if the vein is not opened at once, then it is good; otherwise, you should try again a little below that spot, or above it with speed, if the spot is not inflamed.
And if the spot is inflamed, or the patient is scared, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, as it may quickly attract a cautious inflammation, and do not take a bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if it is necessary.
And if the opening is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that the quantity of blood desired will not be released, then you should repeat the phlebotomy in that hole with precision and enlarge the opening a little, and do this quickly before the spot becomes inflamed, because the spot becomes inflamed in many people due to a small opening.
But if you see it already inflamed, then do not repeat it there, as there is no reason; and place some portion of the oil bandage on it, as it alleviates the blood flow.
And it is better in this case than oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer an oil bandage in every phlebotomy in which you phlebotomize the veins to prevent blood flow, and use this theriac alfadoc and sagzenea when placed on the spot, as the blood becomes thinned and mixed when it is thick.
And if a large abscess forms at the phlebotomy site, which often happens, especially to one who has not been bled before, or if the vein's opening is small, then hurry, and place on the spot a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, and tighten it for an hour, because it will dissolve.
And it is necessary to do this after the blood has flowed from that vein, with the closure of it or another vein.
And if there remains some darkness or greenness at the spot for a few days, it does not harm; and if you wish, place on it something made of aloe and dissolved myrrh, or something of mint or calamint juice or something similar.
And often abscesses and swellings occur due to phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And then place your hand on it, and if you find softness under your compression on it, then that swelling is bad and harmful; and then be careful not to place on it any of the things we have mentioned, because it may quickly cause blood to flow from the artery.
And make a plaster with something that has astringency, so that the spot is hardened, and then treat it with other care until it is healed.
And you need to extract blood from everyone according to the amount of their strength and according to the dominant color of the blood as it appears.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it is red; and similarly, if you see it is thick, then you let it flow until it is thinned; and similarly, if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for someone who is full and strong and needs a single blood extraction, that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and the opening wide.
And in someone who is frail, do the opposite, and the blood should be extracted in multiple sessions, and the opening should be narrow.
And the best way to administer vein phlebotomy is that the cut be transverse, not punctured.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy along latitude and longitude.
And for those prone to fainting from phlebotomy, it is necessary to treat them before phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in pomegranate wine or simple heated oxymel; and extract a little blood in three or four sessions.
And if there is a cold constitution, then before phlebotomy take bread soaked in myrrh syrup or honey syrup flavored with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in a very fragrant aromatic syrup.
And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy, and it is caused by a lot of blood loss, then it is necessary to drink meat broth and very fragrant subtle syrup; and use aromatic substances with aloe, and rub their chest with it.
And use other remedies that we have mentioned in the section on fainting due to evacuation.
And anyone who wants to vent their arm and dissolve their blood a second time, it is necessary for those whose phlebotomy is for large evacuation, and their strength is weak, to evacuate the blood little by little, that is, according to their strength, in continuous days.
But anyone who wants to vent their arm and expel their blood a second time, and their body is strong, should do this around seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
But anyone who wants to draw blood from their body to the opposite side of the part to which it flows should be vented on the second or third day.
But a body in which there is a lot of blood already heated and acute and causing fever, it is necessary to expel a large amount of blood at once, and the opening should be enlarged until fainting occurs, after you have maintained all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse to prevent death instead of fainting, as this often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And it is not necessary when you want to untie the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as the opening of the vein is already closed and the blood flow is difficult, to press on it with force and the bent arm is slightly extended, as this is very bad.
First, leave it until it can be phlebotomized a second time; or remove the coagulated blood at the opening of the vein with the sharpness of the phlebotomy tool; or apply theriac alfarach, or sagzenea on it, and compress it lightly until the blood flows out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if you are forced to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no other option, then you bleed from that spot or from another vein in the other arm.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized instead of the fusca or the basilic vein when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient immerses their hand in warm water until the skin reddens and the vein becomes clearly visible.
And then it should be tightly bandaged with moderate tightness; and then phlebotomize it with a small transverse cut, not longitudinally.
And the opening should be wide and your phlebotomy should be done on the vein a little above the wrist.
And if the blood flow is restricted, then immerse the hand in warm water again and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve the desired amount.
But if it is during the summer, then you are excused from immersing the hand in warm water again, and it is better to immerse the body of the blood in warm water during the winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins because there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.
And the phlebotomy of the right hand’s vein is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that you tightly bandage the hand or use your hand, after immersing it in warm water, until the vein is swollen and clearly visible; and then phlebotomize it transversely; and if you cut it completely, it will not harm in any way.
And make sure not to press the hand too much with the phlebotomy tool, because beneath it are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
And then immerse the hand in warm water again and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in warm water again, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein and restrict the flow.
And when the blood is extracted according to the needed amount, then apply oil and salt on the vein to prevent it from closing too quickly; and similarly, this should be done on all narrow openings.
But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand is that it is beneficial for spleen diseases.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of it as you did in the other.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the uterus, and menstrual retention, and diseases of the kidneys and chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient immerses their foot in warm water and rubs it until the veins are clearly visible; and bandage above the ankle with a strap; and the location of the vein on the heel is visible towards the big toe, and from it branch many veins on the surface of the foot.
And then phlebotomize the widest branch or below the calf towards the heel towards its junction, as it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize it on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves beneath it on the surface of the foot, and apply the phlebotomy transversely, almost as if you were cutting it.
And the phlebotomy should be gentle.
But if the blood flow is restricted, then immerse the foot in warm water again and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake the first time, then try again a little higher, as the location is safe; and do not fear harm, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is towards the heel below the outer ankle.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of it is for hip pain when it is due to bad blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and tightly bandages the thigh from the side of the hip down to the heel about four fingers in width with a long, thin bandage, because it is only visible in this way.
And then when it appears, phlebotomize it with whatever tool you can and transversely, as it is better; or cut it by incision or section, as the location is safe.
And it is very hidden in many people; and if you find it, and it is not visible by touch at all, then phlebotomize any branch of it, which is the one that appears on the back of the foot towards the little and ring toes.
And beware of the nerves, and let the blood flow the desired amount.
And then untie the bandage and apply cotton on the phlebotomy site and press the spot, as it heals quickly.
