Chapter VII
On the treatment of ear blockage.
Sometimes some children are born from their mothers' wombs with unperforated ears, and this also happens in some men, blockage in the ear canal due to injury or flesh growing in it; and this blockage sometimes occurs in the opening of the ear canal that does not reach the eardrum, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And the one that occurs in the opening, which does not affect the eardrum, is in the worst conditions for difficult healing.
And in the one that affects the eardrum, you should hold the patient's ear to the sun and examine it.
And then if you see apparent blockage, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the shape:
With the end of it having a small width, with one part sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be double-edged so as not to cause injury to the ear.
And if the blockage is due to flesh growing in the ear or in the canal, then hold it with subtle forceps and incise it with great care until all the flesh is removed.
And if the blockage is in the opening of the ear, then take a fine rod and heat it slightly with fire, and then put it into the ear canal.
And then if you have felt the blockage with what the patient finds easy, due to hearing heaviness, ease the pressure on it gently; and take care not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place a piece of cloth in the ear according to the width of the opening which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the wound's consolidation; or take wool and soak it in water and sprinkle it over the wound; and if you see the ear already swollen, then you need to remove the wool and replace it with another wool which you will wrap in a plaster made with rose oil, until the swelling has subsided; and then treat it until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the blood flow, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
