Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh grown in the nose.
When in the nose various kinds of flesh grow together, some of which resemble a scorpion in shape or a fish polyp; and this ailment is called polypus because it resembles that fish in appearance.
And some of it is cancerous flesh, stone-like, of dark color; and some of it is flesh not dark in color.
So, in that which is these non-fraudulent and non-cancerous fleshes, you must make the patient sit between your hands and face the sun, and open his nostrils, and prick your nail into those fleshes.
And then extract it to the outer parts, and then cut what you have comprehended from it with a sharp and fine spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; for if any part of it remains that can be excised, then scrape it with one of the fine instruments easily until no part of it remains.
But if it rules with blood or a hot abscess occurs, then you apply what is needed to it; or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then quickly cauterize it until the blood is stopped and all cavities are sealed.
Then put into the nose near the incision some sour wine and water or just wine.
But if the nose is open and moisture flows into the palate, then you know it is healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside it is flesh growing in the highest bones of the nostrils to which excision has not reached.
Then you need to insert a bile from which there is some thickness, and mix it with many nuts, and place between each nut the amount of a finger or less, and make the patient swallow and insert one end of the bile into the nostrils with a ray or another suitable instrument.
And after that is done, he should draw in his breath until it reaches the nasal canals and exits over his throat, because sometimes similar actions are done by children at school, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the bile, one end that comes out of the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a closure of flesh with the nuts that are in the bile, and do this until you know that the flesh has gone with the nuts of the bile.
Then extract the bile, and place in the nose after the blood extraction a piece of gauze, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for some days until it is healed.
But if you need a drying cure, use that.
And this is the form of the capipurge instrument with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
Make this of silver or brass, which should be like a small open lamp, like a small bowl, and the nozzle likewise.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the capipurge instrument should be flat, open; with a handle on the back of it, with which you hold it when heating it in the oil or whatever you want from the juices and absorbable substances.
And this capipurge is valuable: take enforbi of castor, white balayra, ginger, and saffron piletre, long pepper, skafragia, epetum of spic, each an ounce. Mix with juice of bleda and cabbage, and make pills, and dissolve one pill in warm water, and drop it into the nostrils of the lying patient.
