Chapter 75.
To teach the midwives in what manner the live embryos are treated when they come out in an unnatural position.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by its signs, and when you see the woman exerting pressure on her lower parts and wanting to breathe the air, and then she is relieved by the pressure of the childbirth, and hastens the emergence of the embryo, then know that this birth is according to the natural position, and it is the emergence of the baby on its head, and the placenta with it or hanging or suspended from the umbilical cord.
So when you see these signs, you need to compress the belly so that the embryo descends gently because when it descends on its head, it descends with the placenta, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with good cleansing.
But the one that is different from this birth is unnatural and not praiseworthy, because when the embryo comes out on its feet and its body comes out before its head and its feet, and one of its hands, or on its foot, or its head and its hand come out, or its belly, and it is very easily twisted on its neck, and such shapes are not praiseworthy.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these cases and to avoid error and deception.
And I am showing each figure of these, and what tool is used in them so that it is indicated by this and it is established accordingly.
When the baby comes out on its head by natural expulsion, and this is strong on the woman and makes the birth difficult, and sometimes her strength is already weakened, then make her sit, or the women hold her, and vaporize her vagina with boiled fenugreek and moist oils.
And then the midwife inserts between her fingers a small spatula and cuts with it the placenta, or cuts it with her nail until the moisture within it flows out.
And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then the woman needs to be anointed with a mucilage of psyllium and fenugreek with sesame.
And then instruct her, near the anointing, to be compressed and make her sneeze with a condition; and hold her mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will be expelled quickly.
And if both hands of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you need to reduce them easily little by little.
But if it does not respond to insertion, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then shake the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
And if the hands are not turned inside and the fetus dies, then cut them and extract the remainder of the fetus or tie its body to the hand with a cloth and extract it with equal force, because it will be expelled.
About the emergence of the embryo on its feet.
When the fetus comes out on its feet, then you need to push them up, and then turn the fetus gently, and then straighten it, and then take one of its feet and extend it little by little.
But when it is out to the thighs, then you instruct her to exert pressure, and make her sneeze with a condition, because it will be expelled if God wills.
And if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little until you place it in the natural position, because then it will be expelled with an easy emergence.
And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take mucilage of mallow and dissolved gum, and pound it all in a mortar with good pounding, and then anoint the woman’s vagina and the lower part of her belly with it.
And then make her sit in warm water, until it reaches her hypochondria.
And when you see that her lower parts are softened, then make her inhale the smoke of myrtle and place her over it.
And when she has inhaled the smoke for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then make her sneeze and stretch her mouth, and lift her from it, and press the lower part of her belly with light compression, because the fetus will be quickly expelled.
Emergence of the fetus on its knees and hands.
When the fetus emerges in this form, then you need to handle it by inserting your hands little by little; and then make the woman bend over on her neck, and her feet hang down, and she lies on the bed, and hold her hands together.
And then press on her belly little by little, and then extract what is under her feet from the ears until it is prepared in the lower part.
And if the fetus is not expelled, then take her feet and shake them with strong movement, and then press what is over her hypochondria little by little until the fetus rises to the upper parts.
And then insert your hands and straighten the fetus little by little, and instruct the woman to exert pressure until the fetus is expelled.
Emergence of the fetus laterally with one of its hands hanging.
It needs to be handled by reducing the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and shake her thighs with strong shaking, and then administer the mucilages I have mentioned.
And if the childbirth comes, then make her sit on a chair, and then study the reduction of the hand, and straighten the fetus according to the natural position, and make the woman sneeze and instruct her to exert pressure until it is expelled.
Emergence of the fetus on its neck with its hands spread and its face to its mother’s back.
The midwife needs to hold the fetus's hand and then turn it little by little, and align it easily.
And when it is aligned, then place on her vagina what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
And then instruct her to move little by little, and when you have done this, then make her sit on a chair and instruct her to lean to the right side, and then instruct her to be compressed; and make her sneeze with a condition.
Exit of the fetus prepared on its side.
When it descends to the horror of the mother in this manner, consider, and then you cut the placenta with your nail until the moisture is evacuated.
And if the fetus is suspended on its face and neck, then you cut it from the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then push the fetus inside until you place it as needed, and instruct the woman to exert pressure a few times, and it will be expelled with easy emergence, if God wills.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, but this is rare and seldom happens; but sometimes they are born by nature, and not alive.
And count them, even if they are multiplied, with one placenta, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguishing them by the ligament in the umbilical cord of each of them. And sometimes they are expelled just like a fetus with easy natural emergence, and sometimes they are expelled with an unnatural emergence as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult during childbirth and come to what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you treat them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does this with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and is skilled in every figure as it is prepared with the skill bringing health.
Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even ten are formed in the mother, and it has been verified by me that a woman aborted and expelled six, and another ten all formed, which was done by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this must be in the knowledge of the midwife because very soon she will encounter such a case, and therefore she should act accordingly with what is appropriate.
