Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh in the lacrimal glands.
You should know that a nail grows in two ways: either it is hard and nerve-like, resembling a hard thin film; or it is non-nerve-like, resembling coagulated white moisture, which when touched by iron, must be taken with a hook, cut off, and the hook is not inserted into it.
Both types originate from the main lacrimal gland and gradually cover the vision, blocking light and the movement of the eye.
But the method of operating on this involves having the patient rest their head on your lap, opening their eyes, lifting the eyelid with your hand, then grasping the nail with a hook and gently extending it upward.
Then take a needle and insert a hair from a horse, ox, cow, or similar animal, or a strong thread, doubling the end of the needle little by little and inserting it into the middle of the nail, penetrating it with the needle, and tying the nail with the thread; extend it upward, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail that touches the pupil.
Thus, you follow it with the hair until the back of it.
Then you cut the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal gland with a fine instrument or small scissors, leaving the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland so that continuous tears do not occur from cutting it.
Sometimes the nail is extended with just the hook or thread as we have said, and then it is scraped with a sharp-edged lion’s instrument, which has this shape:
And be careful not to touch the corneal layer with the instrument, causing it to tear, and not to perforate the pupil.
After the incision, put a little crushed salt or made-up powder of siniar into the eye, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with what is appropriate until it is healed.
If the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle, nor the hook, then many times this type of nail is treated with medicines and is healed as I have recounted in the division.
If you want to cut it, then open the patient’s eye and take a fine lion’s instrument with a sharp edge according to this shape:
with precision.
If you see that it is rarefied and confused and penetrates the root, then drip some of your saliva into the eye with powder made of siniar or with red powder or crushed salt, and cover the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the operation on it until everything that is there is removed, unless the opposite ulcer is in the eye, then you leave it and treat the ulcer initially until it is healed.
Then repeat your operation on it until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it harms the eye greatly, should be suspended with a hook; cut it off partially, but do not complete the incision to prevent continuous tearing.
Then drip red powder made of siniar into the lacrimal gland until it is healed.
