Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part are characterized by swelling and thickness, which occur near the anus externally or in the space of one side.
And it can be a single fistula or multiple ones.
And when that swelling is old and discharges a watery white fluid or subtle decay, sometimes some of these fistulas are penetrating.
And those penetrating fistulas are known by what exits from them through discharge and wind; and sometimes the patient has discharge, and often worms exit from them.
And some of these fistulas sometimes penetrate into the space of the bladder, and into the urethra; and some penetrate into the junction of the thigh and into the coccyx.
And what is known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and non-penetrating is that you place your index finger into the anus, and insert a slender probe of brass or iron into the fistula when it is not tortuous.
But if it is tortuous, then insert a slender probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel it at all nor is there any discharge of excrement, worms, or wind from the hole, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and then proceed to treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra, then the sign of it is the exit of urine from it and the prevention of consolidation of the area with medicine.
But if it penetrates into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign of it is that the probe reaches there if it is not tortuous into the bone, and causes pain in the area; and it constantly discharges pus; and no medication is effective, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment of them is work and vanity of the many doctors on whom they rely.
But in those that are non-penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected as I will explain to you, and what I have already tried.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises his legs upwards, his thighs inclined to his abdomen, and then insert a lead probe, or a brass one if the fistula is tortuous, until you know the place where the probe reaches.
And if the patient feels it around the anus, then you need to insert your index finger into the anus.
And if you feel the probe on your finger already exposed penetrating by itself, other than what you feel between your finger and it being tissue or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
But some might say that it heals in some men late.
And of the treatment by which help is expected is that you use a slender cautery according to the width of the fistula, as described earlier, and insert that heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those fistulous tissues that are like the shaft of a bird's feather are burned.
And then treat it with bandages soaked in vinegar until all those burnt tissues fall off, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is not healed at any time by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between it and the probe there is a thick layer of flesh or tissue, and sometimes the fistula is at the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you cut with the probe, and be in the fistula until the cut reaches the place where the end of the probe reaches, and by the probe, it is freed and falls.
And then cleanse those fistulous tissues which are like the shaft of a bird's feather and ensure no cause remains from them.
But if a flow of blood comes between you and your operation when you cut those tissues, then the best thing and the lightest instrument is to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, because cautery with fire has two good effects: it burns those adjusted tissues, and stops the blood and dries the moisture.
And then treat it with bandages soaked in vinegar or in crushed things until the place produces scabs, and then treat the wound with ointments that generate and consolidate hard flesh.
And these are medicines that have astringency and drying; when it is restored, it is already healed and do not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula already reaches into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine with it.
And if you then feel the probe and between you and it there is a layer of tissue or flesh, and it is near penetration, then there is no operation in it except by a method of trust and hope.
The treatment involves one of three methods: either cauterize it as we have said; or cut it until you reach the cavity of it so that it is possible for you to insert the necessary tools and the proper treatment; and do not proceed much with cutting so that you do not cut the muscle containing the anus, and cause the patient to have involuntary discharge; and then treat it as we have said because it will heal very quickly; or extend that layer and cleanse that pus by cutting it near the anus, as we have said, with a probe or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those fistulous tissues which are in the cut until you can remove them; and then try to restore the entire wound with cutting, and if the upper opening is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes the fistula is ended in this way: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and at the edge of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is like a needle for sewing leather according to this form:
and insert into it a thread wrapped with five threads or around those; and then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until you reach the cavity of it.
But if it is penetrating into the edge of the anus near inside, then you extract the thread from that hole so that you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and join the two ends together, and tighten each, and leave it for a day or two, and then when you cut more into the flesh, tighten it well until those tissues that are between the two ends of the thread are cut and fall.
And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way is prepared for you, except that it is much in the anus, for you must not do it so that you do not cut the muscle; and then treat it until it is healed.
The form of a spatum spinos with which the fistula is cut: its curve is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as sometimes.
