Chapter 41.
On the incision of abscesses that appear on the scalp.
On the scalp, there are small abscesses, and these are of types of nodules that contain membranes; and their types are many.
And some of them are soft, and some contain fluid similar to lime.
And some of them contain fluid similar to dust, and similar; and some are stony, hard.
And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of them, there is no fear, because the extraction of them does not cause artery harm.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you test them with an instrument shaped like this, which is called a probe, until you know what they contain.
For if what it contains is fluid, then you cut it with a longitudinal section as a superficial incision in this shape:
And start the incision from the line B to the line G. Then, when the fluid is evacuated, you remove that skin which contains the fluid, and leave none of it, because sometimes it returns if any of it remains.
Then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment if available, or in water and salt; and fill the wound with it and leave it until the next day, as this will corrode all that remains of that skin.
And then repeat with the Egyptian ointment a second and third time if needed, until you are sure that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it in this shape:
with a cross-shaped incision, and cut between the two lips of the incision and remove all parts, and force your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if it causes you artery problems, then do what I first advised.
And similarly, do in the lithified abscess in incision and treatment as I have told you; and incision on a lithified abscess is easier, because it has little blood and little fluid.
And sometimes there are some of these abscesses that are on the head in some people with whom there is no fluid; the reason is because I incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess like a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be cracked, and if anyone was struck with it, it would harm them.
But in other abscesses that occur on the head, other than this, there is this chapter, such as the abscesses that come to children's heads and near the roots of the ears, but the incision of all of these should be a superficial incision.
And place the perforation of these at the lowest part of them so that the body is relieved of the pus to the lower parts.
And then treat those with what is appropriate for their healing.
