Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of descending water in the eye.
We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which ones are appropriate to perforate, with an explanatory speech, then according to the health.
Then you need to make the patient sit between your hands on a square seat and bind his healthy eye, very tightly.
Then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the water is in the left eye; or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then with your right hand take the almagda (surgical instrument), if the eye is the left; or with your left hand if the eye is the right.
Then place the tip of the almagda near the edge by the thickness of a ray in the white of the eye on the side of the lesser lacrimal, and push the almagda firmly and rotate your hand with it.
Then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the almagda has reached an empty space.
And the measure of the path of the almagda to the front should be the measure of the space from the pupil to the edge of the blackness, which is the corona of the eye; because you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
Then place the almagda into the location where the water is, and pull it down once and again, and if the water descends immediately, then see that the patient recovers his vision immediately, with the almagda in his eye.
Then let him rest a bit; if the water has descended, then place it again before removing the almagda.
Then when it is dry and does not descend, remove the almagda easily, and rotate your hand with it little by little, then dissolve a little clear gem salt in water and wash the eye with it; then place cotton or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white on the eye and bind the healthy eye with it.
But we and those of our time place over it a dressing soaked in egg white.
And if the almagda does not obey you in entering the eye due to its hardness — because there are some men whose eyes are very hard —, then you need to take the instrument called alberid, which has this form:
And then pierce that junction with it, and do not delay your hand in the hole, but make a path for the almagda to a subtle place.
Then insert the almagda as we have said.
And after completing your work, prepare a proper sleeping place for the patient where he can sleep on his back in a dark house, and he is prohibited from all movements.
And apply to the nature of it what will soothe his nature, and do not let his head move to the right or left at all.
And let the binding be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then unbind it in that dark house and expose the weak sight, and let him see some things, then rebind it until the seventh day.
And you should not do this at the time of treatment or immediately after the infusion.
First, you need to avoid this because the water can move easily with great and forceful regard.
But if an abscess happens, then you need to unbind the eye before the seventh day, and correct it with what relieves the abscess.
Then you release the vision and place on his face a cover to protect the vision for a few days while staying in the dark house.
Then gradually move him out of that house and return him to his normal activities.
And know that in the operation the student of vision is not excused at times, so be brave about the operation.
It has come to us from some of those who are in Artach, and someone said that fire is made in Ayrac with the perforated almagda by which the water is sucked out.
But however, I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this perfectly, nor is this written in any of the ancient books; it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the types of magdaan (another surgical instrument) for those who do not know them:
And they should be made of brass or properly of iron, and their ends should be with this triangular subtlety, the sharp end like this is the form.
