Chapter 74.
On perforation of accidental abscess in the vagina.
Many types of abscesses occur in the vagina, such as cancer, stone abscess, ulcers, swollen tissues, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, cracks, warts, and other abscesses.
And I have already mentioned these diseases and their types and their signs, and their treatments in the division.
And I need to say in this treatise about the hot abscess which comes in the vagina when it is one of the abscesses that collects pus, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron.
Then you need to consider if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with throbbing and phlegm and fever, and if you see it redden and if it is felt, then do not hurry with its perforation, and treat it with what helps with maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms stops.
And then you need to make the woman sit on a chair that has two seats; and recline on her back and adjust her feet to the lower part of the abdomen, and her thighs should be spread, and place her arms under her knees, and tie each with a band to something convenient.
Then the midwife stands on the right side and administers the instrument with which the vaginal opening is opened, the shape of which will be shown in those cases that will be performed next.
And when you want to use this instrument, you need to place the base of the vagina of the woman with the rod, and what is inserted from the instrument into the vagina should not be more than the base of the vagina and harm the patient.
But if the instrument is larger than the base of the vagina, then you need to place powders on the tissue of the base of the vagina so that the entrance of any instrument into the base of the vagina is prevented.
And you need to place the screw that runs in the instrument from the top side and the administrator holds the instrument and turns the screw until the vaginal opening is open.
And when the abscess appears, and it is felt by the hand and is smooth and soft, then you need to cut it from its head with a broad spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you need to place in the wound a swab soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and place the swab in the section in the base of the vagina.
And place outside the vagina and on the pubis clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
Then treat it for two days with ointment that is suitable for this until it is healed.
And sometimes the vagina and the wound are washed so that it is crystallized with water and honey, and then with water in which lily root or long aristolochia is boiled, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the vagina and hidden, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, but treat it with what we have said in the division.
