Chapter 16.
On the restoration of a broken leg.
You should know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the leg bone; and the other is thin and is called the fibula.
And what happens with each type of fracture also happens to the two bones of the arm, and therefore the restoration is done similarly to the restoration of the arm, and the operation is the same.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is turned in all directions.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is turned forward.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you find it below, and it is for reasons that are not hidden from you.
And then administer extension, alignment, and binding of the splints according to that alignment.
But it is necessary, if the leg fracture is extensive and has many splinters, that the extension is less and lighter, and ease it with your skill.
And in the leg, there is some operation over the arm, and it is when you align the splints and complete all your operation, then you will take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the things which are usually placed on the ground, and they are made from palm branches; bind those of small thickness, and not those of the smallest ones, and their length should be according to the length of the leg, from the knee to the lowest part.
And then wrap around each cloth in two wrappings according to its length, and place one on one side of the leg and the other on the other side, from the knee to the lowest part of the foot.
And then tie the two splints in three places, at both ends and the middle, because with this structure, the leg is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it stays in good position.
And a small wooden brace is already administered according to the length of the leg; and the leg is placed in it to prevent movement.
And it is especially necessary that you do this in a fracture, and when with it there is appropriate pain.
And then examine the leg daily and study it thoroughly, and guard it from abscess and swelling or other similar causes; and if any of these occur, then treat it with what is necessary until it is healed.
