On the incision of extremities and the sawing of bones.
Extremities can rot either due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes, or when you have treated that corruption with healing medicines and the healing does not occur, or you see the corruption spreading towards the limb without any apparent cause, then you must incise that limb where the corruption has reached, so that the patient may avoid death or severe damage which is a greater detriment to the limb.
And the sign of one to whom this occurs is that the limb turns black as if it had been burned, or it rots near the blackness until that rot spreads to the limb and takes over the whole body; and then you should quickly incise it.
Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is the bite of some venomous creature such as a sea scorpion, viper, spider, or similar.
And if the corruption or the bite is on the fingertip, then you should incise the finger and not give the corruption space to spread to the hand.
Similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should incise it at the root of the wrist, and not give the corruption space to reach the arm.
And if it invades further, then you should incise the arm at the elbow joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and you see it around the elbow, then the patient’s death is imminent; administering another cure is only a matter of grace.
Similarly, for the foot, when corruption invades the toe, you should incise it up to one of the joints.
And if it reaches the instep of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot.
But if it rises to the knee, then you should incise the leg up to the knee joint.
And if the corruption has already reached the knee, then there is no skill left but resignation, and to leave the patient to death.
And the way to incise the limb or to saw it is that you tighten the bandage on the part below where you want to incise, and tighten another bandage above the location; and the assistant should extend a bandage to the lower parts, and another assistant should extend a bandage upwards; and you separate the flesh that is between the two bandages in a broad space until all the flesh is exposed; and then incise or saw it.
And it is necessary to place linen cloth all around so that it does not touch the healthy part, and that the patient receives a proper bandage and careful dressing.
But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should quickly cauterize the location, or place some powders to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then tie the wounded limb with a bandage at a suitable place, and treat it until it is healed.
And I will recount to you what happened to a man with his foot, this very same incident which I have recounted to you, which is that blackness occurred on his foot with a burning that seemed like a fire burn.
And that corruption first occurred on his toe until it spread to his whole foot.
And then that man prepared himself, seeing that the treatment was progressing to the limb with the severity of what he found of pain and burning, and he incised that foot up to the joint, and he was healed.
A long time later, the same corruption occurred on the finger of his hand.
And then he came to me, and I was compelled to counteract that superfluity with what I placed on his hand of medicines, after cleaning his body; and the superfluity was not counteracted and began to spread to the other finger until it started on the hand.
And he asked me to incise his hand, and I did not want to do it, hoping for the counteraction of that superfluity, and more because I feared the death of the patient from the incision of his hand, as his strength was severely diminished.
And after he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it came to me that that man prepared and incised his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I have included this story only to help with understanding this disease, and to be an example for which it may be recognized and according to which one should act.
