On the form of the instruments used to administer enemas.
Sometimes enemas are made of silver or brass or cast or hammered bronze; and sometimes these instruments are made small and large according to those to whom they are administered, because those used for treating small children should be small; and for those whose anuses are delicate or painful, their enemas should be small.
The form of a large and small enema:
The top of the tube to which the bag is attached should be wide in this manner; and it should be at the place where the bag is tied, as usual.
And the lower end, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (that is, not open) and very smooth, narrowing to a fine point; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of the roots and a little thicker.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep skin, and its root should be a palm in length.
And it should be perforated with many holes as it is wrapped; and the space between the holes should be the thickness of a finger.
Then insert into those holes strong bile of raw bile, which should be from ten gallbladders, or around them; and attach the bag to it; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tightened at the top of the enema tube with strong constriction between two markings, and then administer the enema through each hole: But the quality of administering the enema with it is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance; and be careful that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Then the patient should lie on their back, raise their legs, and place a pillow or sheet under them; then anoint the end of the enema tube with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; then insert it into the anus easily, and the administrator should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands with force until everything in the enema tube is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the enema tube and the patient should lift their legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces a bowel movement, the patient should hold it in as long as possible; and if they sleep with it for the whole night, it is even better for the treatment.
But if you administer the enema in cases of diarrhea and its exit causes burning, then you should repeat the enema until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then the enema tube should be very smooth and narrow, like the enemas used for children.
