Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear that happens in the sac extended over the abdomen from the parts of the inguinal regions, causing the intestines to descend through that rupture to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the sac or its extension, and these two types occur for many reasons: either from a blow, or a jump, or shouting, or lifting something heavy, or similar.
The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the sac, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is a swelling similar to a tumor because the sac compresses the intestine.
The sign of it is when it is due to a tear in the sac, because initially it causes sudden intense pain; and it is a different swelling apparent below the surface, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, with its body outside the sac.
Sometimes the membrane is pushed out with the intestine, and this is called an intestinal hernia with a membrane.
Sometimes it is formed with gas, and sometimes it runs into the crack of the intestine, where it is retained, causing great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of these types of this disease with iron there is fear, so it must be avoided.
And the way to perform the operation is to instruct the patient to push the intestine back with his hand into its cavity if it responds to its return, then he should be inverted over his neck between your hands, and you raise his legs.
Then stretch the covering that encloses the testicles to the upper parts, and cut the covering of the testicles lengthwise; then place hooks in the two edges of the incision as you need to open the incision with them.
And if the incision is according to the size that it is possible for you that from there the testicle is pushed out.
Then peel off that sac which is below the covering of the testicles, until the hard white sac is exposed on each side.
Then insert your finger into what encloses the testicle, into what is between the white sac, which is below the covering of the testicle, and between the second sac, and release with it the adhesion that is on the back of the testicle.
Then move the covering of the testicles to the outside with your hand, and with that stretch the white sac upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle with the sac to the incision site; instruct your assistant to stretch the testicle upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete separation.
And check with your fingers that there is no part of the intestine wrapped in the hard white sac.
But if you find any part of it, then push it back to the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back of the sac, which is under the covering of the testicles, which is the incision; then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until there are four threads, then arrange some of them into a cross shape; and tie with it the sac we said is under the covering of the testicles with a strong binding on both sides.
Then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that none of the vessels that nourish them can transmit anything, so that no swelling or infection occurs from here.
And place another binding like the first binding, at least three fingers' width away from it; then leave from the sac, which is under the covering of the testicles, an amount the size of a finger, and cut all the remainder circularly, and remove the testicle.
Then cut the part below the covering of the testicles with an incision from which blood and healing fluid will flow as we have described before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and apply the binding we mentioned (and sometimes the white sac is cauterized, as we have said near the incision to prevent blood flow, because this often happens) and leave the binding until it falls off by itself.
But if its removal is delayed, then it should be soaked with hot water and placed on it until it falls off as we have said.
Then treat the wound with other wound care until it is healed.
