Chapter 46.
On the forms of the instruments necessary for cutting and perforating.
Of these, the forms of the introducers are of three kinds: one is large, another medium, and another small.
The form of the large introducer is this:
The form of the medium introducer is this:
The form of the small introducer is this:
They are made of iron, with squared ends suitably, so that they quickly enter the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the explorers, and they are called "albered," and one of them is called "berid."
And they are of three kinds: one is large, another medium, and another small.
The form of the large explorer, its form:
The form of the medium explorer, its form:
The form of the small explorer, its form:
They are suitable for these abscesses, exits, fistulas, and boils because they go among the bones and other causes.
And they are made round, thick, smooth, like large needles with which saddles are sewn, and are made of brass, copper, iron, or silver. The best ones are made of brass.
And the explorers are made of black lead, which ensures that fistulas are opened in their concavity, and they reflect light due to their smoothness.
And they are of three kinds: some are long, others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its narrowness.
Form of the large lead explorer:
Form of the medium lead explorer:
Form of the small lead explorer:
The forms of the hooks are of many kinds: some are simple, with only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And some are curved hooks, and they are of three kinds.
And some have two curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And some have three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Form of the large simple hook, its form:
Form of the medium simple hook:
Form of the small simple hook, its form:
Form of the large curved hook:
Form of the medium curved hook, its form:
Form of the small curved hook, its form:
Form of the large hook with two curvatures:
Form of the medium hook with two curvatures:
Form of the small hook with two curvatures:
Form of the large hook with three curvatures:
Form of the medium hook with three curvatures:
Form of the small hook with three curvatures:
And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Form of the large scalpel:
Form of the medium scalpel:
Form of the small scalpel:
The ends of these, with which the cutting is done, are sharp, and the other ends are not sharp, and are not placed in such a manner but for the assistance in the excoriation of nodes, fearing the incision of a vein or nerve. This way, the patient is healed and finds some peace from the burning that happens during the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the almagidas, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
Form of the large magda:
Form of the medium magda:
Form of the small magda:
They are made of brass and are similar to the rod with which alcohol is made.
And it has a punctured end with a hidden blade, and it moves to the inside and outside parts as you wish, as you see.
The forms of the spatimis, which are hidden among the fingers for the perforation of abscesses and are not perceived by the patients, are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
And these are the forms of those:
The forms of the cupping glasses with which the blood flow is cut off, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; their forms:
They are made of brass, round with some length, and they are thin.
And it is necessary that these kinds of cupping glasses, large, medium, and small, be with you so that you can quickly stop the blood flow when needed, especially when medicine is not available to you at first.
However, do not use these to cut blood flow in every part of the body, only in fleshy places, such as the muscles of the legs and thighs, the muscles of the arms, the breasts, the belly, and the groins, similar to the moist fleshy muscles.
And sometimes these instruments are made smaller, resembling the peels of figs in this form, by which blood is stopped when phlebotomy is done, or by incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in this form:
