On the extraction of the placenta.
When the placenta is retained after childbirth, you must command the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze in a certain way, and press your hand on her mouth and nose, and if it comes out with that, good.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole in the lid and place in it herbs that open the mouth of the mother, such as calamint, rue, dill, chamomile, arabic gum, cassia, and centaury.
All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place it on the fire.
Then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the steam comes into the cavity of the mother.
Then make her sneeze as we have said, and the placenta will be quickly expelled.
But if it remains after this treatment and has not come out, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or marshmallow mucilage, and then insert it into the vagina and search for the placenta, and when she has found it, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is attached to the throat of the mother, then insert her hand as we have described, and when she has found the placenta, extract it little by little in a straight manner so that the mother does not fall due to the strong pulling.
First, it is necessary to move her to the right and left sides with ease.
Then adjust the amount of pulling, for it will respond and detach from the adhesion.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already described the treatment with sneezing and the pot with herbs.
But if it is not expelled with all the methods we have described, then be careful not to strain her by repeated attempts at extraction, but rather what has come out to the mother's mouth should be tied to the woman's thigh, and then coat it with ointment and tetrapharmacum; because that will make it rot in a few days, and it will be dissolved and expelled.
But when it rots, a bad smell rises to the head and stomach, and this harms the patient; and then it is necessary to administer fumigations and other suitable treatments.
But some of the Ancients have already tried fumigations with assafoetida and dried figs.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and the placenta:
Should be made of glass or brass.
And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
And keep it until the fumigation is consumed and then repeat with another.
