Chapter 40.
In which the essence of the discourse on the opening of abscesses and their incision is discussed.
Abscesses come in many types, in many ways, as recalled in each case in this book.
And they differ in perforation and incision in two ways, one by the type of abscess itself; and by what we understand about the humors.
And the second way is according to the places on the body where they occur, because an abscess occurring on the head is different from one occurring on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy part is different from one in a joint; and each has its specific treatment.
And some abscesses should not be perforated until the pus in them has matured or they are fully developed.
There are other abscesses that need to be perforated when they are still raw and not fully mature, such as abscesses near joints, because when an abscess is near a joint, it can prolong its presence until it rots the surrounding area, and soon the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that limb; or it is near a vital organ, and if you delay perforation until it matures, it will harm the vital organ; or it is near the buttocks, then perforate it even if it is not mature; and you should not perforate it raw if it is not fully digested, except for the one near the buttocks, so that the core does not rot and spread to the internal parts of the buttocks, forming a fistula, or making it incurable.
But you must know the right time for perforating an abscess, and that is when it is matured.
And you know it is matured when the pain subsides and the fever ceases, and also the reduction in redness and throbbing, the softening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you must know that the perforation should be at the lowest part of the abscess for better drainage.
And perforation should always be along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the location of the muscles, tendons, or arteries; and finally, in all areas where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, perform perforation according to the nature of that part.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the perforation until digestion is confirmed, as we have said; because if you perforate it before that, the abscess will prolong its course with much filth, and soon the lips of the wound will harden and deepen.
But some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the flesh or body as needed, or according to what the part requires.
And you should make a small perforation for small abscesses, and large, wide perforations or many incisions for large abscesses, according to their size.
And some abscesses need the skin to be scooped out and incised, like a loaf of bread that has already formed a crust, such as those that occur in carbuncles and buboes.
And some of these are incised with a three-angled section; and some are incised in the shape of a myrtle leaf, like the abscesses in the groin.
And some of them are treated with a round section and a crescent-shaped section, and similar ones.
But for those without a head, like superficial abscesses, you should perforate them with a superficial or flat perforation only.
And when the abscess is large and has accumulated much pus, you should perforate it and not rush to extract all the pus at once; first extract a part of it, then seal the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and continue doing this gradually until it is completely expelled.
Especially if the patient is of weak strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit often dissipates with the release of the pus, and the patient can die quickly, and you harm them.
Therefore, observe this chapter with great caution, and after you perforate these abscesses, you should cleanse the wounds and consider if the wound of the abscess is small, or is a flat incision, then you should administer flax or old cotton; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you should place wicks in each hole so that they come together.
And if an abscess has part of the skin removed or you have scooped it out around the edges, then you should fill it with old cotton or linen thread, like when you have drawn out bread or roots, without moisture; and keep it tight until the third day; then proceed and treat it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood at the time of your operation, then you should apply cold water and vinegar in which you soak a linen cloth, and place it over the site of the bleeding many times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and care and powders that I have recommended in many places in this book and in sections.
But if it is in winter, and the location of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should soak powders in hot wine and oil, and place them over the area.
And if it is summer, and the places are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and keep them cold until the third day, as we have said, and then you should loosen the abscess and cleanse it and administer what is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses in general, but as per the method of distinction, I have already said about each abscess and the manner of its treatment in specific chapters.
