Chapter 45.
On the incision of the types of nodes.
There are many types of nodes and I have already described all the types of them in the division.
And it is appropriate that I recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence as there is doubt.
So I say that with an excrescence there is heat and fever and vehement pain until the ebullition of the superfluity is subdued; and putrefaction is completed and then fever, pain, and heat cease.
But with a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a certain membrane which is its own proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a pea and it is made like a swelling, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two types, for they are either fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division.
So it is appropriate, when you arrive at the treatment of a node, to explore it and examine it at the beginning with an instrument which is called an introducer, as its form will come in the chapter that follows this one.
And it is the method of examination of abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and you will rotate your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
And then complete your work according to the size of the abscess, and then remove the introducer and consider what has come out of the mark of it.
And if the moisture is expelled, whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial incision as I have said in the other abscesses.
And if no moisture comes out of the mark of the introducer, then know that it is fatty.
And cut over it with an incision having the form of a cross in this form:
As I have shown you, and suspend it with hooks, and strip the skin from every part with ease, and preserve the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that tissue with the node.
But if it is ruptured in the operation, it is not possible to extract that tissue, and many times this happens, and then you extract it in pieces until no part of it remains.
For if any part of it remains, little or much, the node will return in the same way.
And if you see that any small part of it remains, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and apply over it what sets the abscess, and treat it with the other treatments until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you suture the two lips of it and treat it with what generates flesh.
But if a pulsating vein is opposite it, or a non-pulsating one, then you cauterize and fill the place with crushed sage that is vitriol and leave it tight for two days or three until the wound festers and the boiling of the blood rests; and then return to incise what remains of the node.
