On cupping and the qualities of using them.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or brass, or glass.
And cupping is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is cupping without scarification.
And this cupping without scarification is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the cupping with scarification and blood extraction is applied to fourteen places on the body, of which one place where cups are applied is the alnocrati, and it is the back part of the head; and the middle part of it on both sides of the neck together; and cupping of the chin below the mandible further below the mouth; and cupping of both shoulder blades; and cupping of the alohoster, which is over the end of the tailbone; and cupping of the two upper arms, which are the two arms; and cupping of both ankles; and cupping of both thighs.
And cupping does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore does not lose its effectiveness through these, unlike phlebotomy; nor should cupping be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
But if necessity forces cupping due to illness or continuously, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at any time.
The reason is that in some people the blood is multiplied to the extent that they need to extract it by cupping and find heaviness and dizziness in their head; and of those, some find repletion and redness in their face and head, and in their neck; and some find itching in their face and forehead and dimness and dullness in their eyes; and some who vomit the location of their cupping; and some whose laughter is multiplied; and some who find the taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is inflamed and spit blood; and some whose sleep is multiplied, and those who see blood in their sleep as redness and old wounds and other similar causes.
And then when you see any of those causes, and especially if it is on the third or middle of the month, then we command cupping to be done after two or three hours of the day have passed.
And the benefit of cupping on the nape is that it helps with heaviness in the head and those who are sunken around the eyes; but this should be done after evacuating the whole body.
And this cupping is in the location of the cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not lawful to use it on someone with a cold complexion, or who has catarrh, because it does great harm to them.
And therefore it should not be used on the elderly, and on those whose heads have cold diseases.
But for those who continue with it, it causes forgetfulness; and therefore you should command the cupper to lightly place their hand with the cup on the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But cupping of alkehel is in the location of the phlebotomy of the dark and basilic veins: and therefore it helps with asthma, and the constriction of the chest and the splitting of the chest instrument, and cough, and repletion.
And it should be pressed a little, because if placed lower, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
And the cupping of alhagdahan helps with accidental headaches and ophthalmia, and migraine, and preoccupation, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the location of the basilic phlebotomy.
And you should command the cupper not to press with the scarification so as not to cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And cupping below the chin helps with ulceration in the mouth, and gingival corruption, and similar diseases in the mouth, and it stands in the location of the phlebotomy of the sublingual veins which are in the two lips.
But cupping done on both shoulder blades helps with headache caused by repletion of heat.
And cupping of the two parts inside the thighs helps the phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilic, dark, and cephalic veins, because it attracts the blood from all those smaller veins in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the cupper not to proceed too much with the scarification, because the location is devoid of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
And it is a cupping glass with which cupping is done over the sacrum and helps with hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And you should command the cupper to use a large cup, and it should be made of brass, because the location needs strong sectioning; and quickly small cups are placed and scarified with scarification.
But cupping of the legs decreases by clear diminution, because it draws the blood from the whole body, and helps with old pains in the kidneys and uterus, and the bladder; and it provokes menstruation, and helps with swelling and dropsy; and it stands in the location of the phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and alahorcoben, and both ankles.
However, it greatly weakens the whole body and causes fainting in many people.
And the benefit of cupping alahorcoben is similar to the benefit of cupping both legs.
And the quality of the position of the cups is that you place the cup at first empty and suck with moderate suction, and do not prolong the position of the cups, but place them lightly, and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the location evenly.
And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the location redden and swell and the redness of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and repeat the suction little by little, and carefully consider the condition of the bodies.
For the person with tender flesh and sparse pores, you should scarify once and no more, so that the location does not become ulcerated.
And command the cupper to make the scarification larger and a little deeper, and adjust the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then scarify twice, because the first time opens the way for thinning the blood and its watery part.
But the second time it scrutinizes the acquired extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very feculent, then do the scarification a third time to achieve the final result.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or just a little, one scarification is enough.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scarify deeply.
And the limit of scarification is just the depth of the skin.
And if that of which the skin is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are tight, the places for the cups should be smeared with softening, opening, and resolving agents; if it is in summer, such as aloe oil or violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or gourd seed oil; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be amaranth oil, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or dill oil, and similar ones.
But if the cupping patient has wide pores and tender flesh, then they should avoid oil, and it is advisable that the places for the cups near the cupping are washed with rose water or cold water of nightshade, or gourd water, or purslane water, and similar ones.
And those whose blood is very humid should wash the cups with vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac and similar ones.
And those whose excesses are thick should wash the cups with old wine, or water of savory, which is marjoram, or decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar ones.
And it is advisable that cupping be done before bathing; beforehand it should be administered near the bath for one or two hours, and it is advisable to sleep near the cupping.
What is it that needs to be regulated for cupping or bloodletting before cupping.
You should consider at the beginning: if the cupping patient or the one who should be bloodletted is choleric and full of acute blood and inflammation, then they should take cooling agents, such as sour pomegranates, and endives with vinegar, and lettuce, and chicory, and julep, and similar ones.
And give them foods such as chickens, and game bird meats, and foods prepared with sour agents, and similar ones.
And for those whose complexion is cold, they should drink syrup of honey, or syrup of chicory seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant wine mixed between old and new; and it is recommended that they use little to drink and eat, and give them foods such as chickens, and partridges, and pigeons, and small birds.
And it is advisable that on the day of cupping and bloodletting the drink is more than the food.
And it is advisable to give at some hours to some people to drink theriac alpharac, or musk medicines, that is nutmeg, or alcelite before cupping or before bloodletting or nearby, so that the principal members are strengthened and the blood is thinned; and they should not take it heated.
But the cups without scarification are placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, on the knee joints, and the hip, because these members do not tolerate scarification on themselves.
And it is not intended for those except to attract blood from the member, as we place a cup on the breast in the disease of blood flow from the nose; and we use it to dissolve cold viscosity of the member, as we place it on the belly and navel; because it thins the member and warms it and removes the pain because it resolves wind.
And it is placed on the kidneys when obstruction or pus occurs in them, because by the virtue of strong attraction it quickly opens the obstruction and eradicates the pus from its place.
And similarly it acts when placed on the liver and spleen against wind enclosed in them.
And these cups are administered empty with suction only; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered filled with warm water in diseases of the spleen.
And this is so that the cup is filled and is larger, that is hot water alone or water in which herbs suitable for this are cooked.
The form of the cup administered with fire: let the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the depth be half a palm; and let it be on the side of it, in the place that is in the circuit, half of it, the hole be small as the amount that a needle can enter.
Let it be made of red brass or citrus, with thick edges, smooth, equal, and clean so that it does not harm the member upon its position on it.
And let it be in the middle of it a transverse rod of brass or iron, on which a candle with fire is placed.
And let this cup be much larger than the one we have mentioned; and a little smaller than that according to the diseases and the age of the one who uses it.
And the cups for children and the exhausted are different from the cups for the young and robust bodies.
And the quality of placing this cup with fire on the member is that it stretches the wick with the fire of decent wood in front of a little wax candle, and place it on the middle of the transverse rod in the middle of the cup, so that the fire is lit around the lower part so that the body of the patient is not burned.
And then place it on the member of the patient, and the finger be on the hole that we mentioned, until when we hold the cups and do not need to hold the finger and let the steam out through that hole, then the cup will soon be released.
And ignite the wick properly, and repeat it if necessary.
But in a cup that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse rod nor hole, and it is administered only by being filled with water, and it is placed on the member only.
And this is its form: And this cup, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
