Chapter 4.
On the treatment of sharp and acidic tears in the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and they come from the veins on the outer surface of the head, and no medicinal treatment helps, and the patient's face becomes red and feels a crawling sensation on the forehead as if ants are moving, and their eyes are weakened and moist to the point where the eyelashes become noticeable, and the eyelids are heated by the sharpness of the tears, the ancients advised treating this with the following operation, which is now detailed with a knife.
You instruct the patient to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead evenly spaced along its length.
If the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length slightly from the movement of the nerves which are in the tear ducts, and the third on the other side.
Beware of cutting the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand away from the continuation of both jaws.
And if the space of each incision is the width of three fingers placed together.
And have ready a piece of sponge or soft dried cloths to dry the blood.
Then insert a spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision:
that is from the part of the temples to the second incision.
Strip off all the scalp that is between the two incisions with the instrument that is over the bone, and then do this from the middle incision to the second incision.
Then remove this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
Place the sharp side towards the flesh attached to the scalp, and the other side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision, and cut all the vessels descending from the head to the eyes with it.
But continue the incision so that the scalp appears, and then do this in the middle incision to the other incision.
And if an equal amount of blood flows, squeeze the places of the pieces of coagulated blood.
Then place old cotton in each fissure, and place powders soaked in wine and oil and sour wine on them, and ensure that no hot abscess occurs.
And on the third day, untie the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
