Chapter 42.
On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and there are many that are generated among them, and every scrofula among them is within its own membrane, and just as in the nodules and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the types of these scrofulas are many, for among them there are some stony, and among them there are some that contain fluid, and among them there are malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
So, in the one that you see to be in good condition upon touching, of which the color of what is evident is close to the color of the skin, and it is movable in all directions, and it is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not deep, it is appropriate that you incise it with a superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body from line G to line B, and peel it off completely, and extend the two lips of the skin with a hook, or with many hooks if you need them, just as we have said for abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And let the spatula not be very sharp, so that your hand does not slip during the incision, or disturb the patient, and you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incise a vein or artery and you stop your operation, then place on the wound crushed vitriol or other powders that stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound is softened and begins to putrefy.
When the blood is stopped.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then, inquire with your index finger if there remains any cause from the other small scrofulas, then incise those and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is appropriate then that you do not incise that scrofula at its root.
Before, it is appropriate that you tie it with a strong doubled thread and leave it until it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
And if you incise that whole scrofula, then it is appropriate that you join the two lips of the wound and suture it immediately so that no superfluity remains.
But if you see that superfluity remains due to the size of the scrofula, it is appropriate that you proceed to incise its root, and extract it and administer suture as said.
And those of the scrofulas that contain fluid, perforate them with a superficial perforation where the place of maturation appears to you, and place the perforation at the lowest part of the body, just as we have said.
And then administer the perforation, cauterize with ointment and similar substances, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then treat it with generative flesh ointment until it is healed.
