Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When someone has ancient migraines or severe cataracts due to agrimonial moisture and quality in the temple nerves, or ancient and severe sleepiness similar to those, and it is treated with medicinal methods and this does not help, then we have tried for these illnesses the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of them is that the patient shaves the hairs which are in the temples; and pay attention to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in few men due to the force of rubbing.
And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be tightened with a cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or bathe the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you.
And then you take the knife of which this is the shape:
And then you strip the scalp with it easily until you reach the artery; and then you remove it from there and extract it to the upper parts until you extract it from the scalp and uncover it from the tunics which are under it, in all parts.
But if the artery is subtle, then wrap it with the end of the probe, and then incise a part of it according to the amount by which its ends are extended and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow at all.
And then remove one to three ounces of blood.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with strong double silk thread or long cords, and do not allow it to rot before the wound is consolidated and a blood flow occurs.
And then cut the excess which is between the two ties; and do this at that time or at another time.
And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a knife-shaped cautery until the ends of it are incised, and it will remain in place of the same work.
And it is a better operation unless the patient has a fever or is of a hot complexion; because cautery is one of those causes that help with ending moisture, and therefore it is better in the summer.
And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries to fill the place with old cotton, and place well-made powders over it, and then treat it with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with poultices until it is healed.
And if during the operation another time there is a blood flow from the artery, then quickly stop that blood, either with a cautery or by filling the place with cotton, and tighten it with your hand until the blood is stopped.
And if none of those methods are present to you, then place your finger over the place until the blood is coagulated, and then bathe the place with very cold water until the sharpness rests, and tighten it as necessary.
And what is easier in artery extraction is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two places with a probe, and place each one, very ignited, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between its ends is elongated, because they are not entirely consolidated with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of the two blades be even.
But however if they are less sharp than two blades it is better, because if they are as sharp as two blades they will quickly rub together, and will not cut the flesh quickly.
So when there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them and the flesh is cut easily.
And this work is better in every procedure and easier.
And let the space between the two blades be the thickness of a finger.
