The second part begins.
On incisions and punctures and cupping and phlebotomy and wounds and their like.
These are the words of Albucasis.
We have already discussed in the first chapter all diseases for which cautery with fire is suitable, and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes for it, and the necessary instruments with the forms of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters from the head to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that it may be easier for those seeking it, to find what they have requested.
And before I begin, it is necessary, sons, that you learn that in this chapter, there is something terrifying that is also in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that reason, great caution is necessary, because in the operations described in this chapter, many times evacuation involves blood, in which life is contained, through the spilling from a vein, incision on an abscess, opening of a fistula, cleaning a wound, extraction of an arrow, or cutting of a stone, and similar procedures.
And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most of them, death can occur.
And I warn you not to let hesitation fall upon you, because sometimes you may encounter men with many different kinds of diseases.
And some of them will become angry with their illness and will be on the verge of death, due to the severity of what their illness entails, and due to the prolonged duration of their illness, and with the illness, there is fear which signifies death.
And some of them will give you their possessions and say that they hope for a cure, while their illness is pernicious.
And thus, it is not proper for you to agree to help those who come to you in this manner; and let your caution be greater than greed and rapacity; and do not undertake any case unless you have certain knowledge that verifies it for you, and which brings praiseworthy success.
And in the treatment of all your patients, use prognosis and indication of that which turns into health, for this helps you in acquiring fame and memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire you with His understanding and not take away from you direction and protection, for that is in His hands.
And I have ordered this chapter, distinguishing by chapters as in the chapter on cauteries, from the care of the head to the feet, so that it is easier for you to find what you seek and what you need.
