On the treatment of wounds.
I have already mentioned in the section on the treatment of wounds what is suitable for the book, and now I will describe the treatment of those with manual techniques and medicines according to the procedure.
So I say that the wounds are varied according to what causes them and according to the location on the body where the wounds occur.
And the causes for which many times wounds are made are such as the throwing of stones, or incision by sword or knife, or striking with a spear, or with sticks, or with arrows, or similar to those from many causes.
But the wounds that are on the parts of the body are such as a wound that falls upon the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recounting the treatment of some wounds so that you apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
And I will start with the simple wounds of the head, for the consideration of the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
So I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from the throwing of a stone or something similar, and it has only cracked the skin and is a large wound, and you fear for the patient the occurrence of a hot abscess, then promptly perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein, and do not delay; and extract from the patient the blood according to the strength of the person unless some cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is little.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and the patient should avoid repletion, wine, and heavy foods.
But if some cause prohibits bloodletting, then let the patient reduce their food intake and avoid meat and wine.
And place on the wound, if a hot abscess occurs, cotton soaked in rose oil or in wine in which there is astringent.
But if you are sure of a hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is recent with its blood and the air has not altered it, the powder which I will mention shortly.
And if the air has already altered it, then place some ointments on it until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or is by incision of a sword and the like, and the lips of it are not joined by powders, then join them with sutures as I will describe for their suturing.
But if the wound has already exposed the bone and tendon, and there is no other retention but a small suspension, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh next to the skin, and instruct the patient to abstain from foods that are heavy: heads and cooked forms and similar to them, until it is healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that is rotten and remove it, and then treat it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it is not stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find it not incised, then you incise it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity forces you that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is minor; so you sprinkle on them this powder, so that they are healed before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is this: take one part oil of mastic, two parts dragon's blood, three parts unslaked lime; let all be very finely ground and sifted, and let the wound be filled with it, and be compressed with good compression until it adheres well to it, and be coagulated with the blood.
And then compress it on top with powders and leave it, and do not untie it while it is thus until it is not abscessed, for the medicine is not removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes do this only cautiously, when you do not have mastic and dragon's blood present.
And always do this same operation on large wounds when it is necessary that it be placed on them and they be compressed, and these are recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer, then it is not appropriate to apply this powder, but instead treat them with what we have mentioned, so that you place on them some digestible ointments, or you place on them powders of barley flour with water and honey until they remove the rottenness; and then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if with the wound a fracture of the bone occurs, and it is small, then extract it with gesture.
And I will tell the cure of fractures of the head in what is to come.
From the wounds of the neck.
But if the wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple wound on the head.
But if the nerve or artery in the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, do not use astringent agents like zinc and alum, as they are harmful to the nerves and can cause contraction.
Do not apply any cold substance to the wound, as the nature of the nerves is cold, and they are connected to the brain, which is the highest of all organs.
And treat the wound with light medicines, such as washing it with fresh water, sometimes infused with rose oil or not, and then washing it again with fresh water and applying moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then administer sutures, or close its edges, and treat it with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or occurs in a decaying area, then perforate it at the lowest part.
But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessary.
But if the vertebrae of the throat or neck are cut and the veins of the neck are saved, then align the edges of the wound with sutures over the throat and do not touch it; first, align and reduce it to its natural shape, then secure it properly, and leave it for a few days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it heals.
But if the wound in the bone has caused damage, then treat it, and if there are bone fragments, remove all that you can; and leave what you cannot remove until the wound decays, and it can be separated and the removal is easier.
And if the wound is recent, then apply the recommended powder to it.
But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with what is described in its chapter.
From the wounds of the neck or similar ones that occur between the shoulders and are caused by a sword, knife, spear, or similar weapon.
If it is a strike from a spear or knife, and you see its depth, then consider if air comes out of the wound when the patient breathes; then know that the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with its blood, then apply the powder from the first hour, and do not compress it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the patient, but apply an attractive ointment and loosen it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available, then place old cotton in the wound's opening to absorb the moisture; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is inside runs out.
But if three days or more have passed and the patient has not experienced spasms or bad heart tremors or breathing difficulties, and other good conditions are observed, then know that the wound is safe; and then treat it with poultices and other treatments until it heals.
But if its healing is delayed and it remains open all the time, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from an incision by a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with what is mentioned for sutures if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if damage to the bone has occurred and pieces are cut off, then twist the wound and quickly remove those pieces if they are separated.
But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound decays, making their extraction easier.
And for other wounds occurring in other limbs, the judgment in treatment is the same as what we have said.
