On the treatment of sinuses and the quality of irrigation with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it is ruptured and perforated, and the pus is released from it, and the place remains empty almost as if it were a vessel, and the membrane over it is like a fine cloth, and it has not progressed to deep corruption, and it does not impinge upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged until the corruption presses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment for it is to incise that entire membrane as it is twisted, and especially when it is thin and is like cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
But if you expect the membrane to adhere and that the corruption has not yet achieved deep progression, and the membrane has a clear space, then you treat it with irrigation.
And this is what you do: consider the sinus, and if it is large and the discharge is of a fetid odor, then irrigate it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil and sour wine and ginger in equal parts, and place them in a vessel, and cook them over the fire until the medicine turns red and takes on the consistency of honey.
Then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and irrigate the sinus with it, and tighten the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
Then expel it with pressure; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is gone.
Sometimes, the sinus is irrigated with ash water when this medicine is not available; you take vine ash and put it in water; then strain it and irrigate the sinus with it until you are sure that the sinus is cleared.
If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then irrigate with water and honey mixed with crushed ginger, and irrigate with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and you are sure that the sinus is gone, then irrigate it with something that makes flesh grow in it.
And this is done by taking some dyafinicon ointment and dissolving it with rose oil and astringent wine; or you irrigate it with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow so that the irrigation cannula cannot enter, then you gradually widen it with an iron instrument, and place a reed wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened.
Similarly, if the opening is wide, then you sew the edges together and leave a small amount of space for the irrigation cannula without addition.
And if the opening from which the discharge flows is elevated above, then drain it from the lowest point that is in it so that the discharge flows downwards, because when the discharge is confined in the depth of the sinus, flesh will not grow in it.
And if it is not possible for you to drain the sinus from the lower edge of the bone as you wish, then you must prepare the member with a preparation through which the discharge flows lightly as is prepared by you, and that no cause of the discharge is retained in it.
And take consolidative medicines that are placed on the sinus appropriate to what you want, spreading them on linen cloth.
And the cloth should be of such a size as to cover the entire sinus; then you cut with scissors at the right of the opening of the sinus a hole slightly wider than the opening of the sinus; then spread another linen cloth with lion ointment according to the size of the hole, and place it over the first in such a way that it facilitates the outflow of discharge from it and does not remove the large cloth but only after a few days.
But the one that is over the opening of the sinus, you remove at all times so that it can expel what is lodged in it from the discharge.
And so you know if what flows from it from the discharge is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
And also you consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain in it or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And when your treatment is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the matter that is thrown on the opening of the sinus already adhering, or is starting to adhere, then in the morning you untie it or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus after a long time a subtle discharge still comes out, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it is approaching, for there are some people in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds is slow, and in those, the opposite is true.
And if from the sinus for many days undigested discharge has come out, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you add to the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dry as dyafinicon ointment, when it is added to it with the excess of wax.
And the last thing with which it is treated is that you take dyafinicon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and pour over it aged wine equal in its substance, and mix it with it, and use that.
And do similarly in that action, when there is no discharge, dyafinicon ointment, honey cooked until it thickens, and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and incense, crush all and powder it over the honey when it is on the fire, and then spread that on a cloth and press it over the sinus; and spread that with the honey you have cooked until it thickens, and powder it over the cloth and press it.
And sometimes it is treated with long aristolochia and roots of heavenly lily (that is, heavenly lily) and flour of iris and centaury, and use these simply or mixed, crush them and sift and powder them over the honey which I have mentioned; and use that.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in its depth, and already seek it in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then treat it with fistular treatment, as mentioned above.
