Chapter 36.
On the extraction of an abscess from both tonsils and those that arise in the throat and other abscesses.
When a hollow abscess occurs in the throat, it is from glands that are like wool, which occur outside and are called tonsils, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, dark, with little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and its root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the blood flow; instead, leave it until it is mature, and then either you will pierce it or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is white, round, and its root is thin, then that is the one that needs to be cut.
And the procedure for it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already rested in a cool place with complete rest or if it has diminished somewhat; and then you have the patient sit facing the sun, and their head in your lap, and open their mouth, and the assistant holding their tongue down with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or brass, and be thin like a knife.
Then when you press down with it on the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, and you look over it, then take a hook and put it in the tonsil, and pull it outward as much as you can.
After you pull some of the tissue, then cut it with an instrument of which this is the form:
It is like forceps, but the ends are curved, so that the opening of each is towards the other, very sharp, made of well-tempered iron.
But if this instrument is not present with you, then cut it with a blade of which this is the form: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut one tonsil, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, the patient should gargle with cold water.
But if bleeding occurs, gargle with a decoction of pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar astringent substances until the bleeding is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides those two tonsils, and cut them as I have said in the cutting of the two tonsils equally.
And I once treated a woman with an abscess that had grown in her throat, which was dark in color, with little sensation, which had already closed off her throat, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and she could neither eat nor drink water, and she would have died if it had lasted another day or two.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had formed two branches, coming out through two openings.
So I hastened surgically and inserted a hook into one of them, and pulled it, and a large portion came out, and then I cut it where I could see from the other opening, and then I opened her mouth, and held her tongue, and then I inserted the hook into that abscess.
And then I cut out a large portion of it, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Then the woman’s throat was cleared, and she began to drink water immediately, and then took food, and I continued cutting that abscess many times over a long period, and an abscess would form in its place, which I would cut until it was prolonged.
Then I took a tool and cauterized her throat, and it ceased to form; and then I departed and did not know what God did with her afterward.
