On the treatment of sores and fistulae.
Know that any wound or abscess, when it worsens and becomes old, and turns into an ulcer, and is not healed and continuously discharges and is not cut off, then, in any part of the body, it is universally called a fistula and we call it azukem.
And a fistula, in truth, is a hard, white, felt-like node that is not painful and has a cavity like a bird's feather shaft; hence, some call it rizatz, that is, feather.
And in some people, it is moist, discharging fluid; and very quickly the moisture can be cut off in a few hours.
And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and sometimes it is scant, thick, or thin.
And I have already said in the division, when I mentioned the wounds, that every ulcer that is not healed or is not in naked flesh, is so due to one of these reasons: one is either due to a lack of blood in the body; or due to the bad quality of the blood; or because there is hard flesh between the ulcer and the lips preventing the growth of new flesh; or because there is a slight injury; or because the ulcer itself is rotten and the matter sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for its treatment; or when corruption falls in the region and it is pestilence; or due to the nature of the region, as in Zaragoza, where it is difficult to digest diseases, and the healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is a bone or many bones there.
All these causes have been shown, along with their signs and the treatment with medicines, in the division.
And it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistula, which is done by surgical operation.
And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the omentum, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the joints composed in a way similar to the hand and foot; and among those are the ones that harm the proximity of the principal member and similar areas.
And therefore, those among these fistulas which are of this kind are diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive treatment, and dealing with them is laborious and ignorant.
And if there is a fistula, the depth of which does not reach these places that I mentioned, and you hope and trust in its healing, and want to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of bronze or iron, and if the fistula goes straight, then explore it with that.
But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a thin lead probe, because lead, with the lightness of its body, is relieved and curved towards the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to identify it with a probe.
Then inject fluid through its openings, because the moisture with which you inject it will go to the other openings and flow out of them.
And then inquire carefully, in whatever way it is possible for you to determine if there is bone or nerve here, and if the cavity of the fistula is deep or shallow, or if it is a fistula with many openings; consider all this with the sum of your skill, your questioning of the patient, the finding of pain by pressing with your hand on the area, and the appearances of the signs and the causes related to the abscess.
And when you have considered all these causes with true understanding, then come to the treatment with confidence: consider whether the fistula is close or in a safe place, far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or one of the places I mentioned to you.
Then you dry the fistula as previously described, remove what is in it by filtration and the corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening from flesh or other similar tissue, and treat it until it is healed.
But if the fistula is deep, and straight, then it must be cut with a knife as much as possible, and then clean it of all its corrupted flesh; and then apply sponges soaked in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with the iron probe.
And do this with it several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then you examine it and dry it as we have recommended, unless some vein, nerve, or principal part prevents you as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed to you and there is some corruption and blackness, then you scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with something that causes it to regenerate until it is healed.
And if it does not heal and still discharges as it did before, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you expose it again and carefully perform the scraping and cleaning with your utmost skill, and then restore it.
And if it is healed, that is good; if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which cannot be reached, and then it is best to leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract it, then you extract it with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any behind with your skill.
But if some cause of moisture interferes with you, and there is no fear or mistake in their incision, then you incise those ligaments or flesh if they are there, and free the bones.
But if it is not the right time for you to remove the bones, then place over the wound something that can rot the wound, and leave it until it reaches around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and keep the wound from healing, and keep the section that you have incised in your operation open.
Further, if you fear, place over it a cotton soaked in soap and oil, or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments, for when those ligaments rot, and the bones are separated from them, the removal is eased.
But if it is a large bone such as the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and what is corrupted is only the surface, then scrape it only slightly until that blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
But if the corrupted part is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close it and cut it all the way to the place where the corruption has reached, and then treat it until it is healed.
And I recount to you what happened to a man in his thigh so that you may take it as an example and help in your operation.
It was a young man about 30 years old, who suffered pain in his thigh, and from the inner parts of the body the bad matter moved to the thigh, and it was matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and it was not caused by an external factor.
And so the time was extended due to the error of the doctors until the abscess burst, and much matter came out, and its treatment was delayed until the leg developed fistulas, and many openings formed, all of which discharged pus and body fluids.
And then many doctors treated him for about two years, and none had a skilled hand in the art, until I was called.
And I saw his leg and the matter flowing from those openings in large amounts; and the man's body was completely wasted and his color was jaundiced.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
And then I examined all the openings and found that they all reached the bone in various parts of the leg.
And then I hastened and incised over one of those openings until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it corrupted, already crumbly and blackened; and a part of the leg was already corrupted, having penetrated to the marrow.
And then I sawed what was exposed and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I believed that it was not in the bone but only that corruption which I had excised and sawed off, and I had already eradicated it.
And then I applied restorative medicine to the wound for a long time, and it did not heal.
And then I repeated and exposed the bone again from the first exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And I sawed off what appeared to me of that corruption, and then I was forced to treat and restore it, and it did not heal.
And then I exposed it again and did not cease incising the bone little by little in parts and forced its restoration, and it did not heal until I incised about a palm's width of it, and extracted it with its marrow, and then restored it with medicines, and it healed slightly and was healed.
And repetition of the operation and cutting is not necessary except for the condition of its fragility and the lack of its tolerance and fear of death, as it caused frequent bad syncope from excess evacuation.
And then he was healed completely, and in place of the bone there was hard flesh; and his condition was good in his body and his strength returned; and he resumed his usual activities and had no trouble walking nor any other problem.
But if it is a prominent bone in a location of the body that is already cut, then you should proceed in this manner: take a bandage and tie it at the end of the prominent bone, and instruct someone to pull it upwards; place a thicker wool bandage over the first bandage; and then tie it over the flesh below the bone, and extend the end of it so that you pull the flesh downwards, and you expose the flesh over the place you want to saw so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
And place wood or a board under the bone decently, because when you do this the saw will not be prevented from cutting the corrupted flesh.
And the sawing should be done over the corrupted part little by little, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface, it will be necessary to saw it again.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, and it is a single continuous piece, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, then you expose all the flesh around it; and then place wood under it, and then saw it from the first part where the corruption is until the sawing is continuous with the other part.
And the sawing should be done a little according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the cutting but rather in the skill.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult; however, you should examine the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and you should expose it, and clean it according to whatever condition is possible for you, and with whatever skill is suitable for you, as long as it does not interfere with any vein or nerve.
And you should know that the cutters and saws used to incise these bones vary according to the location of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their subtlety, their size, their smallness, their hardness, and their rarity; therefore you must prepare the appropriate instrument for each type of operation.
And you should know that this operation indicates to you the type of instrument you need; because for you there is great study and long experience and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness to the types of illnesses, as you then have for yourself what is suitable for the instruments for each illness.
And I am providing you at the end of this chapter with the list of instruments that you will use with examples with which you will proceed in your practice which you will experiment with on others.
Form of a saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a rasp:
Let the head of this rasp be in the form of a star-shaped nail, and the points be in the form of the points of a stele.
And it is only necessary that with it the heads of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the opening is large and wide.
Form of a larger razor:
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another decently made saw: let it be made with a high arch and the sharpness of it of iron, and its handle of properly made wood.
Form of it:
Form of a razor with a concavity:
Form of another fine razor:
Form of another razor with a curved end:
Form of a small razor similar to a probe:
Form of an incisor with which bones are incised:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this one similar to a rasp, and its end is like a saw, and it is used in many places in bone operations:
Form of a rasp which is suitable for cutting bones:
And its end is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the things we have mentioned about razors and incisors and saws.
