Chapter 37.
On the cutting of the uvula when it is abscessed.
When catarrh descends to the uvula, and it becomes abscessed and elongated, it is called perpendicular; and if it is swollen and round at the bottom, then it is called buba.
But when it is treated with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not help, and then sometimes the abscess is delicate and should be removed, then it is necessary to cut that which is swollen and round; and if it is elongated, and is bloody, dark in color or black, and has no feeling, then it is necessary to attempt its incision, because there is a danger for the patient in it.
And when you see it as I have said, its whiteness and length, that you have the patient sit and press down his tongue with an instrument of which I have described its form, and then place a hook in the uvula, and pull it down and cut it with one of the two instruments which I have mentioned in the cutting of the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut more than what is attached beyond the natural boundary, because if you cut more, you will harm his speech.
And after the incision, use what I have recommended in the cutting of the two tonsils, and treat it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use a method of cauterization without fear, and the manner of cauterization here is with strong water, and it is that you place the patient’s head in your lap, and press down his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living tissue, and place it neither thick nor thin, and with it fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Its extremity should be concave, where the medicine is placed just like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the uvula, and the patient should lie on his side so that saliva or mucus does not run from his mouth from the internal medicine, so that nothing descends from it onto his throat and injures it.
And then hold the medicine with your hand, and squeeze it onto the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see it become blackened and calmed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the end of a probe, and dip the cotton in the medicine, and insert the probe with the cotton into a tube so that the cotton adheres to the tube, and do this as many times as needed until you achieve what you want with the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it as it will dry and fall off in about three or four days.
And if it is necessary to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and after the cauterization clean around the uvula with cotton soaked in rose water, and cleanse with it what is around it from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat externally with ointment, and internally with gargles until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and less frightening.
Sometimes the uvula is treated with something more subtle than cautery and incision, because it is treated with fumigation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, dried Arabic gum, chamomile, fenugreek and similar herbs, and mix all these ingredients, or some of them, in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and boil; and the pot should be well sealed with suitable luting, and in the middle of the pot there should be a hole, over which a concave instrument made of bronze is placed in this manner; it can be made of silver or bronze.
And place the extremity in the patient’s mouth so that the vapor rises to the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is very fumigated.
And then repeat this many times until it is dry, and be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of the abscess, because it would add too much to the abscess, and it is not suitable to do this until after the abscess has been clarified.
But if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and attach an eggshell to the end of it, so that the patient's mouth is not burned, because the eggshell prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is beneficial for health.
