Chapter Forty-Seven:
On the cauterization for leprosy.
Leprosy sometimes benefits greatly from cauterization, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so, when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is starting and you have treated it with what we have mentioned, and if it is not stopping, and you fear the disease will spread throughout the patient's body, then cauterize the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, a second lower down, near the forehead at the hairline, two on the horns, and one at the back, on the nape or neck.
And press your hand with the cautery slightly until it imprints a small mark on the bone, and the scabs are removed, so that the release of thick vapors is facilitated; and cauterize the spleen as previously described.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is visibly manifest, then you must cauterize it with those cauteries we have mentioned on the head; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on the cheeks, two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, a large one near the tailbone, one on the elbow, two on the hips, one on each hip, two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the elbows, two on the muscles, two on the soft parts of the chest; and cauterize it on all the joints of the fingers and toes, on each heel, and on the joints of the hands.
And be careful not to burn the nerves over the heel.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the groin, another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries you apply, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as healthy people do, because their body is already numb.
And the cauteries should be large or small depending on the members and joints as previously described for the types of instruments.
Then treat the cautery with cooked barley flour with honey and other treatments until it heals.
