Chapter 56.
About ulcers that occur on the foreskin and the tip of the penis, and about corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the tip of the penis.
Often these ulcers occur on the penis and are a protrusion of soft flesh.
And among these, one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
For the non-malignant one, you should suspend it with a thin hook and cut it off completely; then place a cotton swab soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; and after that, treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of a blue color, then you should apply cautery to the incision site and its area.
But if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the ulcer inside first until it is consolidated; then treat the outside, because when you treat both the foreskin and the ulcer at the same time, it is not ensured that it will not tear.
And sometimes blackness and corruption occur on the genitals and foreskin, then you should scoop out all that is blackened and starting to corrupt or already corrupted; then spread honey on it, which is mixed with pomegranate peel flour and crushed and sieved roots.
And then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
But if there is a blood flow, then apply lunar cautery in this way:
because the cautery is helpful for both conditions at the same time, that is, for blood flow and for the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the tip of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you should insert a lead tube into the opening of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the tip of the penis (and this adherence only happens to those whose foreskin is intact, and circumcision is not required; and when adherence happens due to a wound or abscess) you should peel it off with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the tip of the penis is freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to separate them precisely, then you should peel off a part of the tip of the penis and the foreskin with a spatula, and this is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is very easily perforated due to its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and the tip of the penis with a thin blade, which has been soaked in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
Then treat it with a styptic wine until it is consolidated.
