Regarding the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are varied according to their types, and according to the places in the bodies where they strike, because their diversity is such that some have large points, and small, and concave, and blunt, which means solid; and among them are those with three edges, and those with barbs; and those with splinters.
And those that are according to the members and the parts where they strike are according to two ways: for the members or principal members like the brain, the heart, and the liver, and the lungs, and the kidneys, and the intestines, and the bladder, and their like; and so when it strikes any of these members and it appears to you signs of death, which I will recount shortly, then you must avoid extracting that arrow in those cases where death follows that in the major conditions, and when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep in the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
And the signs of the brain are when the arrow strikes there, and it pierces the bone, and it comes out from the covering that is over the brain, because it happens with sudden vehemence, and dizziness, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very soon speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and from the place of the wound comes out white moisture resembling dust, and something comes out that looks like the moisture of the flesh.
And so if these signs appear to you, then you refrain from the treatment and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
But the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if it is stuck in a hard place, and not an empty place; and very soon the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and from the wound flows black blood, and follows coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; and then you know that death descends without any doubt.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are the spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient is changed, and they exhale with a great noise, and demand the attraction of cold air.
And if the arrow strikes the covering that is in the chest, and the pain then is near the lower ribs, and a great swelling is made with vehement pain and sighing, and not all the muscle members are harmed.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then very soon from the wound comes out some undigested food.
And if the arrow strikes the abdomen, and is stuck there, some contents of the wound come out, or the membrane, or the intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope in the cure by extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder, and urine comes out, and something passes to the external parts, and very soon there is pain over the patient, then you know it is mortal.
But the other members like the face, the neck, and the throat, and the shoulders and the arm, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the thigh, and the leg, and their similar members, are saved according to the major conditions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will recount this to you what I have seen about these arrows, so that you may know about your treatment.
Which case is, because in a man, an arrow struck in the tear duct of his eye in the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, under the cartilage of his ear, and he was healed, and no harm occurred to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the cartilage of his eye, under the lower eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and only a small tip with which it was attached to the shaft was obtained, and it was a large arrow from the sharp arrows of the Turks, with iron tip that did not have barbs.
And the Jew was healed, and no harm occurred to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had struck his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it had barbs; and so I cut over it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I delicately worked with it, and soon I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had struck his abdomen, and I thought he would die from it; and then, after thirty days had passed and nothing had changed in his condition, I cut over the arrow and worked on it, and he was healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound healed over it, and after nearly seven years, the arrow emerged at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow struck her abdomen, and the wound healed inside, and nothing changed in her condition, and the woman found no harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck his face and the wound healed over it and the arrow remained, finding no pain there, and many similar cases to these.
And I extracted an arrow from the man of the prince of the king which had struck the middle part of his nose and had already shifted a little to the right side, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to the treatment of him soon after the arrow struck within three days.
And then I found the wound from the arrow very narrow; and then I examined it with a fine probe, and I did not feel it; but he felt a prick under his right ear, and then I suspected that the prick was from the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a plaster to the location with an attractive and digestive virtue, trusting that the place would form an abscess so that the location of the arrow would appear to me, and so it could be accessed.
And no significant accident occurred at the location indicating that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days and no accident occurred; and the wound healed meanwhile, and the patient remained without extraction for many days until one day he felt the arrow in his nose and reported it to me.
And then I applied a sharp corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it was opened, and with a probe, I examined it, and I found the fine tip of the arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
And then I continued applying the medicine to the opening of the wound until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly to me, and I spent time on this for a period of four months.
And then, after the wound was enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into it and remove it, and if it did not obey extraction, then I did not cease to handle and work on it with various techniques, until one day I started using techniques to grasp it with properly made forceps, according to the form that will come at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, and I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient was completely healed, and it did not harm him in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you set a rule and understanding about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and its definitions are not comprehended with narration nor do they comprehend the book.
And the wise practitioners compare little over much; and from what is present over what is absent; and find new operations and new instruments for the descent of the external causes of the art when it happens.
And so I say that arrows are not extracted from the limbs where they are stuck except in two ways: either by pulling from the place where they entered; or by the opposite side.
And the one that is extracted from the place where it entered, it is an arrow stuck in a fleshy place, and it is pulled and extracted.
And if it does not obey extraction from the hour it struck, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it decays, and the extraction and egress are eased.
And similarly, if it is stuck in bone and does not obey extraction, then leave it for some days and repeatedly pull and move it each day, and then it will be extracted.
And if it does not obey extraction after some days, then you must perforate around the arrow in that bone on all sides with a fine drill until the place around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already penetrated into one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of those accidents I mentioned appear in the patient, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it until its presence is balanced after a few days; because if the arrow reaches the dura mater, then death is not prolonged.
And if the arrow is not stuck except in the body of the bone alone and does not pass into the dura mater, and the patient remains for some days, and none of those accidents occur to him, then you work on extracting the arrow and its extraction.
But if it is deeply stuck and does not obey extraction, then you use drills around the arrow as we have mentioned, and then treat the place until it is healed.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the body, and hidden from sensation, then you search for it with a probe, and if you feel it, then pull it with some instruments that are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot manage it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein there, then you work on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it has barbs by which it is held, then you release the flesh in which it is stuck on all sides with all the skill you can manage; and work on it, if you cannot manage the evasion of the flesh with the fracture of the barbs and their twisting until it obeys.
And when you manage the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps on all sides until it obeys; and work with utmost subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and its extraction is not made difficult for you.
And if you cannot manage it at that time, then you leave it for a few days until the parts around it decay, and then work on it again because then it will be eased.
But if you encounter a flow of blood, then you manage it as we have discussed in its chapter.
And guard your skill from cutting a vein or nerve, or tendon, and manage it with every technique you can for the evasion of the arrow; and do this with ease and tranquility and slowness and firmness as I have recounted to you.
And so you contract the arrow so that the patient is according to the shape according to which it was when the arrow struck him, because it is more helpful.
But if this is not possible for you, then you manage with what is possible for you with the shapes.
But the arrows that are extracted by the opposite side, or where some part of it already protrudes outward, or the tip of the arrow causes swelling by sensation of the part above the close flesh and sometimes that part is prominent; then you cut over it; and the cutting should be according to the quantity that the forceps can grasp; and then you pull it, because it is made easier to extract.
But if it is held in the bone, then you twist the blade counter to the way until the arrow presses into the bone, and enlarges itself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for some days, and then work on it until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in it, then you push it with it.
But if the shaft is broken and you want to push, then you insert into it, if it is broken, a concave instrument so that it fits into the concavity of the arrow's tail and then push it with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you push it with a strong instrument inserted into it, because the arrow is eased by it.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must excise all the flesh where the poison is, if this is possible for you, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
And if the arrow falls in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with the probe, and it is possible for you to cut over it, then cut over it and guard against cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then sew the wound if needed, and treat it until it is healed.
The form of forceps with which the arrows are extracted:
Let their ends be like a bird's beak which are made with a saw so that they do not let go of the arrow.
And many types of these are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
The form of a concave pusher with this concave end like a bird's feather so that the insertion of the arrow is eased, and the pushing of that broken one:
Form of pusher of broken end:
like a ray so that the insertion of it into the concave arrow is eased and it is pushed with it.
