Chapter 76
On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus with what we have discussed in the section on medication and it has not come out, and you are forced to use manual operation, then you must consider if the woman is of healthy constitution and not afflicted with any conditions that could lead to her demise.
Then, the woman must be laid on her back on the bed, with her head inclined downwards and her thighs elevated.
And the assistant should hold her from both sides or tie her to the bed so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
Then, you should moisten the mother's genital area with humid oils and mucilage of mallow, fenugreek, and linseed.
Next, the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages, and then gently insert her hand into the mother, searching with her hand for a place to hook onto the fetus.
And appropriate places for this are: if the fetus is positioned to come out head first, then you should hook into its eyes, or the neck, or the mouth, or the palate, or under the chin, or in the collarbone area, or in the spaces near the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
But if it is positioned feet first, then in the groin, or in the middle of the back.
And you must hold the hook with your right hand, place the curved part of it between the fingers of your left hand, and gently insert your hand and place the hook in one of those mentioned locations until you reach the empty cause.
And then place and fix another hook, or a third if needed, so that the traction is equal and not just in one direction.
Rather, it should be pulled in all directions, so that its extraction is eased, just as it is done when removing a tooth from its socket.
It is necessary that the stretching is softened; and if any part of it is retained, the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and gently insert them to loosen the retained part.
Then, if a part of the fetus is removed, the hooks should be moved to a higher place; and do this until the whole fetus is removed.
But if one hand comes out before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its tightness, then cloth should be wrapped around it; and then extract it until it is completely removed, and cut it either at the wrist or the elbow.
And you must do the same with the other hand and the two feet.
But if the fetus's head is large, or if it is constricted in the delivery, or if there is water in its head, then you must insert between the fingers a pointed spatula and pierce the head to extract the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” whose shape will be described along with other instruments in the chapter near this one.
And do similarly if the fetus has a naturally large head: then you must cut it with a knife, or take it with the alunda as we have mentioned; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head has come out but is constricted at the clavicle, then it should be cut until the moisture in the chest is released.
But if it is not complicated, nor responding to extraction, then you should cut the head as soon as possible as you are able.
And if the lower abdomen is abscessed or has dropsy, then you must pierce it so that the moisture inside can flow out.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then its traction is light and its direction to the mother's mouth is light.
But if it is constricted around the belly and chest, then you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand, and cut the belly and chest until what is inside flows out.
But if the other limbs are out and the head remains, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then insert the hand into the throat, search for the head, and pull it with the fingers to the mother's mouth, then insert a hook, or two hooks, and pull it out with them.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an abscess that occurred, then it must not be worked on; instead, moist and fatty remedies should be administered.
And apply plasters; and have the patient follow a regimen of baths that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, it should be turned: and follow what we have said for a live fetus.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary that no part of the placenta is left inside.
And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about treating the abscesses that occur in the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood, then have her sit in astringent baths and administer other treatments.
And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and then she became pregnant again, and the fetus died again.
It happened to her after a long time an abscess in her navel; and it swelled until it opened, and began to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat it, and treated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
Then I applied to it some strong drawing plasters, and a bone came out, and after a few days, another bone came out; and I was greatly amazed, as there are no bones in the belly.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I treated the wound, and extracted many bones from it, with the woman being in better condition, and she lived in this way for a long time, discharging a little pus.
And I do not consider this strange, but rather see it as knowledge and help in what the skilled physician can administer by hand for healing.
