Chapter 6.
On the treatment of what falls into the ears.
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four types, for it is either a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, like iron and glass, or it is from a plant like a pea or bean, or it is a flexible thing like water and sour wine and similar substances, or some animal.
And so when a stone falls into the ear or another similar thing that does not get stuck or grow in the ear, hold the ear to the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip some violet or sesame oil into it, and then administer its extraction, and make the person sneeze, and block the nostrils to prevent sneezing.
Then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear upwards, as many times it is expelled with these actions.
And if it is not expelled, then administer its extraction with the instrument called "gesti epicicarios," which has this shape:
And if it is expelled with "gesti," good; if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle hook of little duplication.
And if it is not expelled by this, then make a brass cannula and insert the end of the cannula into the hole of the ear and seal around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula is open.
Then extract with your breath with strong suction, for many times with this we have succeeded.
But if it is not expelled in this way, then take some "alum" or "vecz" used for catching birds in a small amount, and place it on the end of a stick, and then wrap it with cotton decently placed.
Then insert it into the hole of the ear easily, and then dry the ear of moisture.
And if it is not expelled with all the methods we have described, then hurry to cut it before it becomes a hot abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut it is to first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein and extract blood according to its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear towards the thickness of it in the well-pressed place.
And let the incision be of a crescent shape until it reaches the stone, and, having found the stone, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then sew the incision immediately with speed, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the thing falling into the ear is one of the fats that grow and swell, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey you to come out, then take a thin and subtle spatula of this shape:
and use it for the excision of that lump which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do this when you think it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in many pieces, and then extract it with hooks or subtle gestures, or by incision as we have said, for its extraction is made easier.
But for water that has entered the ear, the patient should sneeze at the beginning, and fill the ear with some old cotton, and lie on the ear with the water in it, and if this expels it, good; if not, then take some thin and long stones according to the length of a finger, and heat them a little in the fire, and the patient should insert one of them into the hole of their ear and jump on one foot of that side and strike with another stone on the stone inside the ear.
Then do not stop with the stone until all the water is expelled.
And the water will already be expelled if you take some paper or cloth, and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end over the fire until most of it is burnt.
And then put another cloth and do this many times until all the water is expelled, and extract it with a cannula as said above for extracting the stone.
But for the extraction of an animal entering that ear, if it is a small thing like a flea or something similar, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing that is visible to the senses, then administer its extraction with hooks and forceps, and the reason for it is easier than all other things that fall into the ear.
But for the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and it does not work, then you need to hold the ear to the sun.
And if some cause of the worms appears, then extract it with hooks or subtle forceps, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, which has this shape:
And insert the subtle end into the ear according to the amount the patient can tolerate; then suck with it strongly, and do this many times until all the worms are expelled.
But if it does not obey you to come out, then seal and close around the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that the ancients have already tried in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your infusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear be done with this instrument, which has this shape:
And make it of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole, and flat on top.
And then press down on what is in the concavity of the cannula to inject it where necessary.
And if you want, take the rod and wrap the end of it with cotton decently, then pour oil into the concavity of the hearing, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines into the cannula — which is in the ear —, then insert the rod with the cotton on it and press it with your hand with tempered compression until the oil is expelled into the hearing concavity and the patient feels the oil inside.
And whatever is poured into the ear should be warmed a little with fire.
And beware that the substance you drip into the ear is not too cold, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
