Chapter 39.
On the extraction of leeches stuck in the throat.
When a leech is treated with what we have mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and it does not help, then look in the patient's throat in the sunlight, after you have pressed down their tongue with the instrument we have described.
So if you see the leech, extract it with a small hook or with delicate gestures properly.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the tube, and do this as many times as necessary (until the leech is dead and falls off from the throat) and the patient should abstain from water all day.
And then take a glass full of cold water, and rinse the mouth with it; and do not swallow any of it and wet the mouth with the water every hour with the hand, because the leech will fall as soon as it senses the water.
But if it is not expelled with what we have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida with the instrument we have described in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it will fall off.
And there is another method of operation in fumigation of that, which is that you take a pot in which there are burning coals and the pot is covered with a lid in the middle of which there is a hole, and the extremity of the instrument is placed in that hole; and then do the fumigation; and the patient places their mouth on the end of the tube, and closes their mouth so that the fumigation is not expelled until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech, because the leech will fall off soon.
And if it does not fall off, then repeat the fumigation many times, and the patient should abstain from drinking, and eat salty foods and garlic, and not drink water, and with this regimen it is necessary that it will be expelled.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps as seen, except that it has a certain curvature:
which is placed in the throat, and its extremity is like a stork's beak, which is toothed, so that when it grasps something, it does not let it go.
