Chapter Thirty
On the removal of teeth.
You must treat the tooth's pain with all ingenuity and delay any extraction because there is no substitute once it is removed, as it is a sublime substance and excuses are necessary for its extraction.
But when the patient is forced to have that tooth removed, you must be firmly certain which tooth is painful because often the pain deceives the patient into thinking it is in a healthy tooth, and you remove that one, and the pain does not cease until the actual diseased tooth is extracted, as we have seen from the work of barbers.
So when you are certain which tooth is painful and know it well, you must then scarify around the tooth with a spatula with some potency until it is loosened from the gum on all sides, and then move it with your fingers or with fine forceps initially little by little until you can shake it loose.
Then place large, strong forceps firmly around the tooth, and put the patient's head between your knees to hold it securely so it doesn't move, and then pull the tooth straight out in a manner that does not break it or cause the patient greater pain.
And if it is not dislocated, then take one of those instruments and place it under the tooth on all sides with ease and force its removal as done initially.
But if the tooth is hollow or corroded, then you must fill that hole with cloth and tighten it with the end of a fine stick so it does not break during your constriction on it with forceps.
And you must work delicately with scarification around the gum on all sides and be very careful with your strength so you do not break it and leave part of it, and cause the patient to return with a problem worse than the initial pain.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and boldness with their extractions, not administering what we have recommended; because often they cause patients great ailments which are more difficult to cure than broken teeth, leaving the roots behind, or extracting the tooth with parts of the jawbone as we have often seen.
And after the extraction, the mouth should be washed with warm wine or sour wine with salt.
And if there are blood flows because of this, as often happens, then crush some amount of sage and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not help, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and fine tongs with which the tooth is initially moved should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick, so they do not bend when you work with them.
And they should also be with thick handles so that when you squeeze them they do not bend, and should have short extremities.
And they should be made of Indian iron properly made with straight extremities, and at the ends of them should be teeth which interlock with each other and tighten with strong constriction, and sometimes the ends should be in the shape of the beak of a bird called a stork, that is, a crane, and are for strong constriction.
