First chapter.
Summaries and collections of the nature of bone fractures, from those whose preface is necessary, before we begin the recollection of broken members and the diversity of each.
Therefore, we must state in the preface of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the practitioners are forced and to dwell on the truth of them; that is, you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art among you.
And thus I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or falling occurs, then you must hasten at the beginning with bloodletting or alleviating that, or both together, if no cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if it happens to a child, or an old person in decrepitude, or if it is a time of intense heat, or intense cold.
And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and meat of birds and goats; and prohibit heavy meats and filling oneself with food and any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of preventing abscess, and if you do not fear the effusion of material to the part.
And then return the patient to their previous regimen with which they are accustomed.
And thus when the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed with nourishing food of substantial and heavy nutrition in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of wheat cooked with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine and similar to them, and with this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture is made more easily and better.
And know that broken bones in people who are in their prime and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their parts.
And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature always due to the dryness of those parts, and they are continued and consolidated those that are in their final gentleness, such as the bones of small children.
But still nature joins and amends over the broken bone from all parts some substance similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and tightens it until they are glued together and bound together, until they come to the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its work.
And for this reason, it is necessary to provide the patient with food, food in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Great diversity of fracture according to the diversity of the part.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the parts, for a fracture of the leg bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly, all other parts are different among them.
And I come with the recollection of every type of fracture, explained in its chapter distinct from the other.
Great diversity of fracture in itself.
And the types of fracture of the bone are diversified in themselves; for there is an arched fracture different from what occurs in stars; and sometimes there is a fracture along the length of the bone: and these are fractures of splinters and splinters and protruding and non-protruding additions, just as is done in the pen when it is prepared for writing, and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And for each type, there is its own method or instrument in the restoration of it as will be remembered distinctly in its places.
Great signs of bone fracture.
And by this is a bone fracture known: it is the tortuosity of it, and its prominence and appearance to the touch, and it is that when you compress it with your hand.
And thus when there is no apparent tortuosity in the place and it is not done by your touch when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there is tortuosity or a small fissure, then you must not harm it with your hand and with complete compression; then apply to it the medicines which will be remembered at the appropriate moment for the place; and then it should be tightened with a subtle constriction.
And know that the place when it is arched and not split in two or different from what does not happen in splinters, as every part of its counterpart is kept, then you must begin immediately to rectify it before it gets a hot abscess.
And if it gets a hot abscess, then leave it for a few days until the abscess ceases; and then straighten it in every way you can with lightness and skill.
And know that the restoration of it and the healing of it is easier than that of the bone in which splinters occur.
And then tighten it according to the remembrance of it.
But if there are splinters in the bone, then extension of the broken part from two sides is necessary, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the part is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and the hand.
And be your position with which you place the part equal according to its natural shape, while the parts of the broken part are extended, then you must return those additions with skill and in every way you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that no pain or injury happens to the patient by your operation; and force yourself according to your ability to apply one bone with the other its companion according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that time you skillfully touch it with your hand, and if you see any deviation, correct and align it according to your ability.
And strongly avoid excessive extension and compression, as many foolish doctors often cause a hot abscess by their operation, or cause contraction in the part, as we have seen happen many times by their operations.
And then attach, then equalize and perform decent operation and constriction of that part, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make them avoid harming it during their waking hours and sleep, and watch their movements and activity, and monitor their excretions, and all their movements with all your ability; and make sure that the position of the part is such that pain is minimized, because when they feel pain or injury due to the position of the part, then you must change it to another position in which they do not feel pain; and ensure that the position is straight and even, so that the part does not become twisted when it is restored.
And the quality of the constriction of the broken part is what I recount; so you know that broken parts are diverse in their smallness, greatness, and shape.
And for those that are small like the arm and the finger and the joint and similar to them, then the wrapping must be of very fine cloth.
But for those that are large like the thigh or the leg, they must be wrapped with broad and hard material, because the broad binding connects the large part and tightens it equally from all sides, so that no blemish enters.
And then begin, with your equable evacuation, to place a suitable binding on the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings as the part requires; and tighten your hand a little with the binding.
And then go with that to the upper part of the fracture site, and tighten less than the constriction with which you tightened the fracture site.
And then extend the wrapping of the fracture site a little, and gradually loosen the constriction, until you take a large part from the site.
And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken site with wrapping, and then go with the wrappings to the lower part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the constriction of the wrapping and in the loosening of it as we have said in the first wrapping above.
And then place between the wrappings flax tow or cloth with which the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized, if there is tortuosity; and if not, place nothing there.
And then place another bandage over it, and then properly align splints over these wrappings immediately, if there is no swelling or hot abscess at the site, and then place over it what soothes the abscess and removes the swelling; and leave that for a few days; and then you tighten the splints over it.
And let the splints be made of half a broad split reed, and well shaped wisely; or they be of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each splint be according to this shape and figure:
However, the splint placed over the fracture must be thicker and broader than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to what is suitable to the part in size and smallness; and then tighten over the splints with another bandage according to your initial constriction; and then bind it decently with thread according to what we have said about constriction, and it is that your constriction be according to the site of the fracture mostly, and the further from the fracture, the lesser the constriction.
And the threads must be moderate in thickness and subtlety, and be of soft linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some foolish ones placing their threads of twisted linen rope, and it is a great error, because the constriction would be uneven.
And likewise thin threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve with them the constriction that you want, and there must not be less than a finger's width between splint and splint.
And if the patient is hurt by the ends of the splints near the constriction in their places, then place flax tow or combed wool under them so that it does not cause injury.
Sometimes a fracture is with a wound, and there is disruption in the skin, and I will remember this in the chapter on special cases.
And know that not every broken part is constrained with splints on the first day; the reason is that when the part is large, you must not place splints on it for about five or seven days or more, according to your certainty of the coming of a hot abscess.
And this is the way of the poultices with which the Ancients restored, which are placed over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Way of common poultice for the quick restoration of fracture, suitable for many complexions and mostly for women and children, because it is of that upon which neither heat nor cold prevails: and it is that you take mill dust, which is the fine part of the flour that hangs near the movement of the millstone on the walls of the mill.
And make it as it is, but sift it with egg white, and prepare the mixture not too thick nor too thin; and then use it.
Another method of a poultice for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take asafetida, labdanum, acacia, elecampane, and migrach, which is the root of wild pomegranate, each 10 drams; myrrh and aloes, each 5 drams; alochil 20 drams; all should be ground and sifted and mixed with aloe water or egg white if the patient's complexion is warm; and then use this poultice, because it is well-composed and easily restores broken bones, and is suitable for many people.
Another method of poultice which helps with fractures and twists: take migrach and marshmallow root each 10 drams; myrrh and aloes each 5 drams; acacia 6 drams; Armenian bole 20 drams.
All should be ground in a mortar until well crushed, sifted, mixed with water or egg white, and then applied.
Method of poultice for joints and bones separated from their places, to relieve pain in them and for fissures and fractures: take dirty wool, submerge it in sour wine and boiled oil, and place it on the affected area.
But in this poultice there is no restorative virtue, it does not treat abscesses and properly expels pains.
Another method of poultice that restores broken bones: take leaves of a wild fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; grind them all and make a poultice from them.
Method of a quick poultice administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of remaining abscess: take roots of marshmallow, chamomile and violet flowers, flour of vetch, each part equal; all should be ground and cooked with wine, if the limb is not warm.
But if it is warm, then make it with water from wet coriander or water and use it.
Another method of a stronger poultice for resolution than the first one, when a hard abscess occurs during the restoration of the limb: take roots of marshmallow and linseed, and pomegranate peel, sweet clover, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, each part equal; all should be ground and cooked with willow water or sweet water or wine, all according to the quality of the limb and the rest of its color.
But Hippocrates did not say in his book that anything should be placed on the broken limb during its restoration except for a cerate made of wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommended that it be of medium thickness and consistency.
But in Gaul it has been seen that substances with drying properties and a little warmth, like myrrh, incense, and similar things we have mentioned, are placed on the broken limb during its restoration.
Method of a poultice that relieves injury and pain: take breadcrumbs, chickpeas, human hair cuttings or bird feathers, and marshmallow, and salt, equal parts; all should be ground and sifted and cooked, and made into a poultice.
But the quantity according to which the binding should remain and then be loosened is that you consider if no pain or itching occurs and the bone is not broken or out of place, then do not loosen it for many days.
And if severe pain or itching or swelling occurs in the area, then immediately loosen it and remove the poultice.
And take a linen cloth and a damp sea sponge, submerge it in warm water, and use it to wash the area until the itching stops and the pain subsides; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place dirty wool soaked in sour wine and oil or rose oil on it, and bind it for a night until you are sure there is no abscess, and the swelling of the limb has subsided, and the pain has gone away.
And then repeat that gentle binding and small poultice and do not tighten it as much as you did at first, and continue until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess, redness, pain, and swelling and all symptoms have completely disappeared, and you need a poultice and binding, then repeat it just as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
And if none of those symptoms occur in the limb, then do not loosen it for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how it appears to you by the binding of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the flesh begins to coagulate over it.
And then adjust the binding more than your initial binding, and adjust the patient's diet, as previously mentioned.
But if you see that the fracture site is drying and thinning more than it should, then know that nourishment is not reaching it; and then wash it with warm water every time you loosen it; and do this every three days; and slightly loosen the binding, and through this operation, nourishment will flow to the limb, and it will heal more easily.
But what foolish bone-setters do when the fracture is not set properly from the beginning, and it heals crookedly, is a mistake according to their operation, and a great fear, and if it were correct, the Ancients would have mentioned it in their books and worked with it.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable not to do it.
