Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, sons, since I have completed for you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its completion reaching its end, and through its expositions and its explanations, it seems to me that I should complement it for you with this treatise, which is about the operation by hand, that is, surgery.
Because the operation by hand is laid low in our region and in our time, completely deprived, until the science of it is greatly endangered, and the trace of it is removed; and only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which mostly changed and turned into errors and doubts, so that their understandings are closed and the strength and art of it is extended away.
And it seems to me that I should revive it with the organization of this treatise in that way through exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work as well as with the addition of explanation, and with preparation of it, which is necessary.
But the reason why no good practitioner is found with his hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner first to be trained in the science of anatomy, which Gualia recounted, so that he knows the arrangement of the limbs and their forms, and their joining and separation; and has knowledge of the bones, the nerves and the muscles, and their number, and their exit points; and of the pulsating veins and the still veins, and the locations of their origin.
And therefore, Hippocrates says that with one name it is great, but in practice small, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken of that in the introduction of this book; for he who is not knowledgeable in what we have said about anatomy, cannot avoid falling into error, by which men will die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are trained in this science and throw themselves into it without knowledge and without experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had incised a scrofulous abscess in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed and the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who had advanced in age, and the stone was large, and he came to it and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, for which that man died on the third day.
And I was already called to remove it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I recognized he would die from it.
And I saw another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and came upon a black eunuch who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor, with his ignorance, set the fracture over the wound with cushions and splints with tight bandaging, and did not leave any breathing room for the wound.
And after some days he loosened it according to his wishes, and rebandaged it, and left it for some days and commanded that the binding not be loosened; and so it remained until the thigh and foot were abscessed and reached destruction.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the binding, and he achieved calm and thus relieved his pains.
But however, the corruption was already established in the limb, so I could not stop it, and the corruption continued in the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated for some days, until its malignancy was increased by its master (host).
The reason being that the cancerous ulcer is full of melancholic humor, thus it should not be completely removed by iron (surgery), but should be in a limb that can completely tolerate being removed.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation by hand be divided into two parts: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is work with which there is danger in the major conditions.
And I have already mentioned this in every part of this book where there is an operation in which there is error and fear; so it is necessary for you to observe this and leave that, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
And so take your tools with diligence and with the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God leading to health and praiseworthy success, and leave the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and put away your tools from what makes you fear, so that doubt in your faith and in your name does not evade you: for more remains for your glory, and higher in the world and ultimately for your sanctity.
Gualia has already said in some of his admonitions:
"Do not treat bad diseases, so that you are not called bad doctors."
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and first of the first part.
The first chapter arranged from head to foot, in the forms of the instruments and the tools of the cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part.
The second chapter, on cutting and piercing, and on cupping, and on wounds, and on extracting arrows and similar things, all categorized and arranged by the forms of the instruments.
The division of the third part.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the healing of twists and similar things; a chapter arranged from head to foot, and on the forms of the instruments.
