O sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last part of medical science, because it follows its consequences, and for its explanations and descriptions, I consider that I have pleased you with this treatise, which is based on surgery.
Since surgery is practiced in our region and at all times, when it is greatly lacking, then the science of it remains; its traces are left; and a few small descriptions of it are found in the books of the Ancients, which change their interpretations and positions, to such an extent that they are closed and extended in force and art.
And I consider that I have given life to that with the arrangement of this treatise in that second way of explanation and description and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of instruments of cauterization and other tools of work by addition of description, and for preparation, which is necessary cause.
May the cause for which a good artisan does not excel in his art in our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and he has to learn before all things the science of anatomy which connects Girdle within itself since it knows the spring of the limbs and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and recognizes the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their names, and the flexibility of them; and the pulsing veins and quiet veins, and places of sensation.
And therefore say I that "hypocrisy" which is a name in itself, makes small work and more in the art of surgery.
May we have already said in the entrance of this book; for who does not know that I have told you about anatomy, it is not evident that he does not fall into error and cause the death of men, so many times as I have seen such ones formed in this science, and having gotten themselves from that science and those experiments.
For I saw a doctor who had fallen ill and experienced an ulcerous abscess in the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries of the neck flowing with much blood until the woman died between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who thought that he had swallowed something in his stomach, which was large, and went to him and removed that thing with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for him to be removed, and I saw that by the size of the thing and the position of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery, and he put him in a black cast that was broken in his crotch; and prepared the doctor because of his ignorance, removed the fracture on the skin, with needles and threads to tighten it, and did not leave the skin breath.
Then he removed it according to his desires, and then he prayed, and then he left it with some days and ordered us to remove the bandage; and thus, within that time, the crotch and foot were broken, and came to ruin.
And I was called for him, and I prepared to remove the bandage, and with success there was peace and relief of their pains.
But the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that he could not restrain it, and did not stop walking the corruption in the member until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who had pierced a cancerous abscess and became ulcerated in some days, within which the evil of it spread to his lord.
For this reason is because the hot water is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not cover that it should come to you with fire of all, but that it is a member which you suffer that of all comes to you.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the surgery of the ma be divided into two operations: one in an operation to which health is associated, and a work in which danger is present in the greatest dispositions.
And I have already done that in all places of this book where surgery is performed in which it is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep that away from you and not open it, so that the pages do not rob you of your way to speak and confuse you.
And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your misfortunes with help and constancy.
And use the best way by the grace of God, and achieve salvation and worthy succession, and keep your terrible misfortunes of difficult healing, and put your weapons away from where you are afraid, lest it be lost in your faith and in your name; because there remains to you to glorify, and then go into the monastery and behind your sanctities.
Guiliam I said: "In a few months, I will leave this world, and my soul will not be in this place." Don't put bad medicine; because you don't know where you are going.
And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered by the head, in the forms of instruments and tools of cauterization, and from that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of cutting and piercing, and of vacuums, and of blisters, and of extraction of arrows and of the same things applied to those, is well divided and ordered by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of cure for injury and of the same things applied to those; is well divided by the head, in the forms of instruments.
I will tell you the quality of the healing things of that cauterization and of the dangerous things of it, and in what combination it should be forbidden.
Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the healing thing of cauterization and of the dangerous thing of it is long and prolix, subtle by science, and hidden away; and from it to speak a great multitude of wisdom, and from it I agree, and for me it is enough with a small part of their speeches, threatening length.
And therefore I say that cauterization brings together all the combinations universally, which is made of one substance or another; except two combinations, which are combinations of half and half substances.
In the combination of dry and half-dry substances, there is a disagreement; for some say that cauterization is helpful to that, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for dry and dry diseases which are quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable for disease that is dry and dry to be cured.
And he who says that opposite of this is true, that by cauterization it is made to heal in all kinds of malady and dry that comes out in men's bodies, because when you compare the man's body with the fire's humidity, the man's body becomes wet.
And I say by the speech of that person, which I have already experienced some times and discovered it myself.
But nevertheless I do not cover that it comes upon this one what already has been exploited and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by later exercise, and knows the diversity of the man' complexions and the dispositions of the illnesses in their methexes, and the causes of those, and the accident of their, and the space of the time of those.
But in the other complexions, it is not upon you a fear, and more in the dry and wet illnesses, because all the illnesses are agreed about them, and they are not agreed in the healing by cauterization of those ones.
And you know, children, that of the secret of healing by cauterization by fire and of its goodness, it is upon cauterization with medicine that burns, because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and does not harm the other member by small damage.
But the action of burning medicine reaches to that in the members which it makes dry, and hard it brings about pain in the ill member which is difficult to heal and hard to endure.
But the fire, by its smallness and by its substance goodness, does not make it but that it is superfluous; And I have already known it through experience and through length of service in studying about truth of causes; and for this one I am excused from the length of the speech And if it were not that it is not read to you secretly because I am afraid, the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expelling by which it expels the illnesses, would be made clear through philosophical demonstration, which would serve to sharpen your wits.
And you know, children, that the seasons are opposite for the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage by the accident of time is submerged in the healing power of this one which is made to come out by cauterization, and more if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, hard and sharp, which do not suffer delay because it is feared from those who bring about evil, which is greater than small damage entering by the time.
And thus you shall not judge in your wits, or children, this one is not considered but the common people and the foolish illnesses, so it is that to that illness which is healed by cauterization is convenient at all times, and pause that consequence.
And the cause is not good like this one where they are concerned by it, because cauterization is only in place of medicine which changes the complexion and dries the humidities which are the cause from which pains come.
But nevertheless cauterization on medicine by impulsiveness of its goodness and the excellence of its operation and greatness of its lordship.
And it is possible that the illness which has been administered to it by cauterization returns in some hour of the time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and the goodness of it; and because it is prepared in its bodies by addition of superfluities to it, and because it is obtained from it in its acquisition in foods and resemblances of those causes; but if the illness for which cauterization was administered is a subtle one in some member of few superfluities and humidities, then by cauterization of teeth because of pain and resembling that, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but comes little.
And but a vulgar speech is that cauterization is the last medicine remedy, and it is an unjust speech to those who understand it in it, because I think that it is not a healing that profits from medicine or any other cause, but by cauterization.
And the cause is opposite to that; and I think that cauterization is the last medicine remedy only when we administer the ways of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not provide, but at the end of the cause we administer to it by cauterization, and profit from it. And then I say that cauterization is the last medicine remedy, not according to the speech which I understand from the common people and foolish illnesses.
And they said that cauterization in gold is better than cauterization in iron, and did not say this one but because of the equality of the gold and its smallness.
And they said that the place of cauterization does not make it break, because I have already seen and touched that it does not do this one but in some members which have others, and cauterization with fire is good and better than cauterization with iron as they said; but when you make cauterization with gold by fire, it is not known to you, because it is made according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive it; and if you put on it without noticing, it melts the gold into the fire, and case in the fire some sheets so that the artisan works hard with it because of its occupation.
And by it is made cauterization with iron, we must put it gently and carefully to the right operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter in cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those of the book within the pages, so that you ask this one what it wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers to humidity and cold on the servile accident of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of soda and many types of flux raumatic, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the arms and ears flowing, and many types of sleeping, and toothache and gumache, and generally all kinds of illness that come because of coldness.
The form of this cauterization is this one, that first you command to the patient which is made to come out by lacative medicine on his head pronouncing, for three or four nights, according to whether you demand the goodness of the patient and his age and his usual clothing.
And then you command him to shave his head with a razor, and then he sits between your legs on a bench and puts his hands on the top of his feet.
And then you put the edge of your hand on the side of his nose between his ears. But nevertheless, when this one tells about the place where it is coming from, it signs that place by trial, and then makes this cauterization which is made in this way:
And then you put it on the place gently, in a way that it descends, and by which the patient's hand is forced little by little, and you turn it.
And then you lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see already some quantity of hair from the head, as well as the amount of dirt that it has on it, then you raise your hand, and if it does not turn to iron, then from another one, because it is cold, before it turns out to be hair which I have told you.
And then you take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and leave it there for three days.
And place it on the cot hidden in the border, and leave that one on the inside which is destroyed by fire. And cure that wound with fourfold bitter medicine until it is healed.
And they say that when the Roman plague broke out, so too did the barley, for it is better and more nourishing.
And they say that it should be cauterized within the bone itself, and that it should retain the cautery within so that a part of the bone's surface is burned.
Then have it shaved that is close to the bone, then heal it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the back of the bone, firmly pressing it within so that the bone does not break, and this is the way to cut a small piece off: They estimate from that location the vapors from the head.
And it should be kept open for a long time, and then heal within so that it hardens.
Perhaps I do not see these two types of cauterization as much, but rather in some cases out of fear; and leave that one to be better for it is the salvation, when it is so; because the head is a part of continued movement, especially when the head of the patient is fevered.
And the first type of cauterization is more saved and better in my opinion; and from that one, I do this work to save it, and then heal.
Second.
Of the head cauterization.
When in total the head causes chronic and long-lasting pain and water is present in the patient for a long time, and uses of scatters and poultices and calques and ointments and plasters and balms and other things, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with another cautery, then consider that because the head is of strong creation in its nature; and it does not cause great harm or damage, then cauterize it again with a little bit of another cautery. Then cauterize that one on the corner of his head with a cauterizer within so that the bone is broken. Then cut the bone and uncover it from the quantity that we have counted, and cauterize that one in the back of the head at the location called "vas" — and that is the place where wind blows. And praise your mother in such, and do not uncover the bone, for the patient's water causes great pain different from the pain of all the other head cauterizations.
And you should direct this cauterization to its location, for because the cautery with which the head's corners are cauterized is less subtle than that with which the crown of the head is cauterized, and this is the way of it.
Second.
Of cauterization of the emigre who has not been ancient.
When the pain at the back of the head is hard, or there is a painful pressure within the ear, have the head emptied by medicine, and administered to it the other cure, which I spoke of in the various types of illnesses; and if that does not help, then cauterize it with burning and iron.
Perhaps cauterizing with burning medicine is better than taking an ale of honey, and scorching that one and rubbing the ends of both sides of the head. Then cut the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp needle within so that it reaches its hidden location, then keep it covered.
Then press tightly over it with a constricting bandage, and leave it for three hours; then pour the honey, and leave the plague for two or three days, and place it on the cot hidden in the border, so that the area hardens.
Then heal that one with cold medicine until it is healed.
And if you have them, prepare some of the burning medicines that I wrote in the second medical treatise.
Perhaps cauterizing with iron according to this method:
and it is called a small wedge, because the head has such a form in which there is a slight curvature, and in its middle is a little prominence.
Then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand back — so that the iron does not burn the skin which is left behind — and turn the small iron quickly.
And if the amount of skin that is removed by the edge of the bone is about a quarter of it, and raise your hand up so that the artery is not removed from the part which is left behind, so that blood does not flow out freely.
Then wrap the cot in salt water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; then remove the wrapped part from the border, and heal it with cold medicine until it is healed.
And if you see it, cauterize at the end of the knife according to the cauterization method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this emigrant who has not been ancient.
Fourth.
Of cauterization of the ancient emigrant.
When you treat the ancient emigrant with the water that we have spoken of in the previous cure, and with the water that we have spoken of in the various types of illnesses, and if that does not help, and sometimes because of the illness itself which does not contain enough water for the first cauterization with medicine or fire, then consider that you ignite the cauterizing knife within so that it whitenizes, because it signifies over the location of the pain with a long line from which most of it comes, or that one; and place your hand back for a second time, and tightly hold the small iron and turn it quickly.
However, you must be careful not to damage the continuation of the jaw, which is very important for chewing, and that the tongue is not removed, and that it does not become paralyzed; and that a spasm does not occur.
And if you are careful about the flow of blood from the artery which is cut off, because when one cuts it, there is a fear, and more so than that which does not know how water flows and does not study it and does not expect it; then leave the operation on the patient at the beginning.
And I come back to the memory of the regiment of the accidental flow of blood from the iron according to its method, in its location of freedom.
And if this illness does not help that type of cauterization, and the patient can tolerate it, then heal the plague within so that it is healed.
And if you see it, administer the cauterization which we spoke of in the second part of the iron method using two knives, and it is better cauterization and more certain.
First.
Of cauterization of the pain of the ears.
When the ear hurts because it is scratched and the pain is treated with soothing medicines and the other cure which I spoke of in the division, and if the pain does not come back, then burn the cauterization, and this is the one that has no precise point, and this is the way:
Then place the point of the knife close to the ignition, and direct it towards the entire ear as it is rolled over, or around each semiluna if the pain is in any one of them. Along with the knife' edge along the ear slowly and carefully, so that you do not hurt the location with trying to touch it.
And if the cautery must make points all around the foot, and then bring it up, and appropriately heal the wounds that are there so they can be healed.
Chapter VI.
On the Cauterization of Scurvy.
Scurvy is cured and cauterized with spices that come through the blood, as we have said in the division of scurvy diseases.
Avoid cauterizing with a spice that comes through drought or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of scurvy with poultices and calms and gulping, and do not confer your cure, then consider that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: the first on the ear, and the second a small cauterization on the thigh, and the third on the union of two lips.
And pause the small cauterization for the opposite of the scurvy departure, for softening does not happen except in the part that is healthy and whole.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterization on the right side of the tip of the ear, placing a small one on top of the hairline, and in the thigh, whose length should be according to the length of the said poultice, and pause your hand so that the quantity of the spice is burned up by half.
And this is the form of the cauterization, which is especially for the knife, the shape of which is placed before you. But even more it is that this one little bit also comes to its ends; and consider that the knife does not cut in vain a little.
And then heal the wounds with water that is before it is healed so that they can be healed.
Chapter VII.
On the Cauterization of Old Apoplexy.
When old apoplexy is and you do not confer your medicine to the patient or there is no fever, then cauterize it with four cauterizations: on all the hairlines of his head; and on the cauterization and the middle place of his head, as we have said; and on the chin. And the way to do the cauterization is to do it according to what has been said before.
And then it is cauterized on top of the stomach's mouth; and more so; and it should be carefully healed with water that you heal before.
Chapter VIII.
On the Cauterization of Oblivion Caused by Flame.
Then give the patient in the beginning large poultices and pills with the servant shouting.
And then shave all of the patient's head and place it on his chest, covered by a cloth described in the book about plasters.
And pause that one for a few moments, for that is a way to cauterize. And make water according to the order that we have said before.
And thus if by that one it is healed well; and otherwise, then do three cauterizations on the back part of his head, which are sent down from the top-most part of the head to the back part within the hairline. And pause between each cauterization the thickness of the said water, and appropriately heal the cauterization with water that is proceeding.
But if you add to the patient water they can bear, then do the cauterization in the middle place; and if you have added more, then cauterize it on top of the hairline on either side.
And appropriately heal that one within so that it can be healed; and make the olive-shaped cauterization according to the form that was placed before you.
Chapter IX.
On the Cauterization of Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body.
Then process in the head's healing with poultices and water that we have said; and shave the patient' s head, and cauterize it in the middle place of the head, and on all the hairlines, and on the back part of the head, and on the three places of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body to those who can bear it and the disease is strong, then cauterize that one with four cauterizations on the back places, and most importantly make the hand hot so that the spice is burned up by half, and hold it. And then heal that one within so that it can be healed, and this one is olive-shaped cauterization.
Chapter X.
On the Cauterization of Epilepsy.
It is not cauterized with epilepsy, but this one is caused by the blood.
Then give the patient a strong poultice to begin with and another cure that we have said in the division when the disease is great and the patient can bear the experience of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gulping and chewing with the servant healing, before water for two days, with the good-tasting food.
And then shave the patient' s head, and cauterize it with one cauterization in the middle place of the head according to the previous way, and another cauterization on the top of the head, and on each hairline; and cauterize the patient' s skull. And if the patient is strong and can bear it, then cauterize that one with all the mentioned cauterizations, in having paralysis and softening of the body on the spine of the neck and back.
And make olive-shaped cauterization according to what has been said before.
But if the patient is a child, then pause with a small cauterization according to this way.
Chapter XI.
On the Cauterization of Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt blood and gross flame, then cauterize that one with all the cauterizations that we have said when in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess flowing to melancholy, and the patient' s body is moist, then give that one water to heal the brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
And then shave the patient' s head, and then make it red with a poultice placed on top of the circle, and then pause that one in the middle place of the head.
And the patient may be given six cauterizations, and it is held by all parts.
And then pause with a ointment; and it is more worthy to go before sheep-shearing. And burn that one over the fire by warm heat according to measure, which tells him when it is too hot or not hot enough. And then put that one in the middle place of the head on the circle, and let it rest so that it cools down.
And make water with the patient once a week and give him the other cure that we have said or, if you prefer, cauterize that one with very small points according to what is most appropriate for him: this is a special way of cauterizing that wets the brain with equality.
And then pause that one that is red in sheep-shearing or gray-blue.
Chapter XII.
On the Cauterization of Descending Water in the Vein.
When you hear the beginning of water in the vein by the signs that we have said in the division, then begin and give the patient water to heal his head, and keep that water from all moisture.
And make this man's bath in water for several days.
Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize this man's scalp; then cauterize this man's two temples with two cauterizes if it is the beginning of water in two holes, or a single cauterization if it is the beginning of water in one hole.
Then cut with a cauterizer all the veins and arteries that remain tied up; and let the cauterizes be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
And beware of any bleeding from the cauterization; and if there is any bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine, which is at your disposal.
And I will bring you a wisdom that is in the extraction of veins and in the absolution of those, and beware of any bleeding from him.
And some veins are cauterized in his neck with two cauterizes that run along the bones.
Chapter XIII.
Of the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and dry, flowing through the veins and arteries that are in the prominent place of the head, and it is seen that they are superfluitatio fluxs of phlegm, then cauterize this man with a cauterizer that we have described in the beginning of water flowing into holes, and cauterize this man's scalp with one cauterization, and two cauterizes on each temple, and two cauterizes at the base of the neck where the bones are. And if you want to add more, then cauterize this man' entire jawbone at the base of the skull, on the outside edge of the ear, with a small cauterization.
Chapter XIV.
Of the Cauterization of the Smell from the Nose.
When you treat this man with water that we have described in the division and do not profit from your treatment, then prepare three cups of wine for the patient to drink; and then cut his hair short, and cauterize him half with a cauterizer and the other half with an olive cauterizer. Then cauterize this man with a garlic cauterizer on each of his two ears, leaving the hair a little short.
And beware of any burning that you do not set it on fire.
And this is the form of the garlic cauterizer.
Chapter XV.
Of the Cauterization of the Softening of the Eyelids of the Eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize it with a cauterizer shaped like this moon; and this is how to do it:
And if you want to, then cut his hair short on both sides of the face with two cauterizes, and make them long from the temples. And let the length of each cauterizer be according to the amount of the eyebrow.
Do not squeeze your hand too much with the cauterizer, according to the quantity that a third of the eyelid is softened.
Chapter XVI.
Of the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Eye When the Hair Turns to the Inside and Sticks to the Eye.
When the hair of the eye turns to the inside and sticks to it, cauterize it in two ways: either with fire or with burning medicine.
If your cauterizer has fire, order the patient to look up at the sky where the hair will burn off, extending and twisting it; and if it sticks, then tie the eyelids tightly with a cloth so that he does not hurt himself.
Then tie the hair tightly and twist it, then pause the patient's head on his shoulder, and put a seal on his eyelid with a ring, which is according to the figure of a sword, and this is the beginning of the seal near the hair.
Then put an egg in white wine or a grape juice on the eyelid.
Then ignite the cauterizer, and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize on the shape that you have described, little by little, making it look like a fire of thyme, completely burning the surface of the hair, which is thus, as it were, surrounded by a sword of oak.
The seal of health for this work is that you see the eyelids of the eyes already contracted and the hair of the eyes lifted by the cauterization.
Then lift your hand up and hold it like this for three days, then put it down on the egg white or grape juice. And then treat that man with oil within, so that he is healed.
But if for some reason the hair turns to the inside and the eyelid is softened again, then make the cauterization again after the first one.
But if the hair is in the eyelid below, then cauterize it so that it rises to its natural place and does not stick to the eye; and may the hair not touch the eyelid.
But your cauterizer has burning medicine; command the patient to look up at the sky where the hair will burn off, extending and twisting it; and may it be bound with a cloth so that he does not hurt himself. And may the shape of the cauterizer be like a fire of thyme.
Then take care to clean and prepare your instruments, and let your hands be ready for the work. Chapter XVIII. Take care to clean and prepare your instruments, and let your hands be ready for the work. Then mix those two causes together, and make a paste of it so that it is not dried out; and then spread the paste on the cloth in the form of a fire of thyme, and put it on one side of the eye; and put the other eye on the other side; and pause the patient' head on his shoulder; and put an egg in white wine or grape juice on the eyelid.
Then pause it on the medicine and hold it for a little while; and do not squeeze your hand too much with the medicine, according to the amount that the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for the burning is in his eye.
Then when you see that the medicine has a bitter taste, then let it rest and wash your hand with water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been raised already by itself when it was washed, as it should be; and if not, return to the medicine on the spot where it has not been wet, for it will not harm you; and if it is too hot or too cold, make a mixture of it with water.
Then put it down on the edge of the cloth where the hair has been cut off, so that it is removed from the irritation, then treat that man with oil within or another medicine, so that he is healed.
You must be vigilant in your work so that the medicine does not get into the eye, and if the hair sticks to the eyelid, then repeat your medicine on that spot where it has been softened, and properly there, as it begins, put an egg white or another medicine to be healed.
And this is the form of thyme.
You should know that the eyelids of men vary according to their size and age. And so, according to water, your remedy will be prepared.
And do not hide the way to make this remedy from those who study it in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the Cauterization of a Fistula that is in the Lacrimal of the Eye.
When you treat a fistula that has been mentioned in the division of the thighs and do not confer with your treatment, then consider that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to keep their head still on the table, and have a minister hold their head some distance between their thighs so that it is neither disturbed nor agitated by the patient's head.
And then put a warm wax or a paste of wool on the patient's neck.
Then light the cauterization from which this form is made:
which is concave, thus with a curved end or a pointed end, from one end of which the cauterization is made.
And if it goes in, let it penetrate to the other end. And if you want it to go out thus with an effort.
However, the concave one is better for the work of the hand.
And then press on the fistula if it is open, and clean and dries it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then put the cauterization on it which is well lit, and at the same time place the patient' hand or the servant' hand on the side of the nose, so that the patient' hand or servant' hand does not feel the heat of the cauterization, and then put the cauterization on the root of the nose and corrode it.
And if at the beginning of the hand' cauterization it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization one or two times, if necessary, and leave it alone for three days, and then put a paste of oil on it around and inside to dry up so that it heals.
However, if it has not healed in eleven days, then put on it an acute corrosive medicine and cut it according to what you have said in the patient' chapter.
And another way of cauterizing a fistula that they first mentioned: Go to the site of the fistula and then pierce it and put in it an amount of molten lead; and let your hand be over it, and do not let the lead reach the patient' neck so that it burns the fistula, and then consider that you have cauterized it and dried it up with incredible healing.
And if the fistula is healed with water that we have mentioned in the cauterization and treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a trumpet from the nose and reduce the fistula to its root according to what will come out at its own place.
Chapter XVII.
On the Cauterization of a Cut or Wound on the Skin.
It often happens that wounds or cuts appear on the lips, and most often on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those wounds or cuts with water that we have mentioned in the division of the parts and do not confer with your treatment, then consider that you cauterize them thus:
Is it in its cavity according to the subtlety of a knife blade.
Then put that well-sharpened knife into those wounds so that the cauterization reaches the edge of the wound.
Then heal it with cerume so that it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
When there is a boil in the soft palate or the hard palate or the teeth, it bursts and bleeds, and then it is broken and raw, and then it forms a fistula, and you do not confer with your treatment, then consider that you ignite the cauterization according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that burning cauterization on the root of the fistula, and at the back of it make it burn so that it reaches the edge of the fire on the edge of it, and once or twice more; and then heal it with water that we have mentioned in treatment so that it heals.
And if the healing has dried up and it has healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the site and remove the bone according to what will come out at its own place.
Chapter XX.
On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Veins.
When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, treat them with medicine and do not confer, then consider that you place the head of the patient on the table, and then put the tip of your hand over the vein so that it does not reach the patient' hand, and immediately put the fire-lit cauterization into the tooth, quickly; and let your hand be over the patient' hand so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
Then remove your hand, and then repeat the cauterization a few times according to what you want.
Then place the patient' mouth in a bowl of salty water and hold it for an hour, and then wash it out, because the loose tooth is stuck and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupting moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the Cauterization of Toothache.
When toothache is caused by cold or heat, or it does not confer with treatment by medicine, then cauterize it on the edge of a cow or fire.
Cauterization on the edge is that you take cow's blood and boil it, and then put a knife blade in it, and then wrap it around the end of the tooth, and quickly put the boiled blood on the tooth until it is heated.
Then repeat that cauterization a few times within which the virtue of fire reaches the edge of the teeth.
And if you see it, dip wool or a knife in the blood, and put it on the tooth, and then put a burning knife into its cavity.
However, the cauterization by fire is that you attend to the whetstone of iron or of steel, and it is in the center of it with some thickness, and the acuity of the fire does not reach the patient' mouth.
Then light the cauterization according to its form, and then put it on the tooth, and let your hand be over it so that the cauterization is heated; and make water a few times because the pain remains or on this day or on another day.
Then consider that by the power of that fire, which the patient holds in his mouth with good edge, it keeps it for an hour and then washes it out, and this is the form of the cauterization.
Cauterize it according to what you see fit, as it is possible for you.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter XXII.
On the Cauterization of an Extropulum.
When the extrophulus is made of slimy or fluid humors that are not obedient to medicine by swallowing, and you see the digestion of them slightly, then consider that you light the cauterization which is concave in form, having two open ends so that the smoke reaches the other end, and put it on the swelling a few times, and then consider that you put the burning cauterization on one end of the swelling, and then put it on the other end so that it burns; and then heal it with water that we have mentioned in treatment so that it heals.
And if the abscess is small, then pause the cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it rest for three days and pause over it in the border inside until it has healed so that the fire has burned it up.
Then clean those wounds and bandage them well until they are cured.
Chapter. XXIII.
Of cauterization for warts and constriction of the bile.
When the humidities come upon the throat of the lung, and mostly when the air is cold in temperature, then it is customarily said that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place where the gumma is lodged.
And beware that you do not apply the cauterization to the gumma or burn with the fire of the patient's throat, but only a little bit.
And cauterize that which needs to be cauterized again at the joint of the collar at the last vertebra of the neck. The patient should be laid on his side, with his head turned so that it faces the fire.
Then clean those wounds which have come before them until they are cured.
Chapter. XXIV.
Of the cauterization for lung rash and coughing.
When the cough and lung rash are due to humidities that do not cause fever or a tickling, and they are old rashes, then cauterize those two places on the furculum at the lodged places, and another place on the middle of the foot between two breasts; and let it be the clavified cauterization according to the preceding form.
And if you wish, your cauterization may be pointed like the one called "puncta," whose form you follow in the case of pain in the ears.
And let there be points within those; and clean those wounds which have come before them until they are cured.
And now the cauterization is done with three ramps, because there are three kinds of cauterization, which are done according to this form:
Chapter. XXV.
Of the cauterization for tickling, which is at the tip of the tongue.
When the tip of the tongue is dislocated by slippery humidities and does not return to its place in an hour from its falling away, then reduce the dislocation first, and then turn the patient over on his back; and if it has fallen away to one side, then raise the leg which is at the tip of the tongue to that side, and lift the heel to the other side. And if the dislocation has fallen to both sides, then raise the heels together.
And you should have two ramps for the fire; and this is their form:
Then cauterize the tongue within that which has fallen away within, and that which is to the other side of it; and this is the form of the two ramps:
In some cases, it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason are these the cauterizations. VIII.
Then pause the fire above the cauterization point with salt, and then quickly make it adhere to rest, and let the member not be troubled by any pain until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is to the inside, and then it has fallen away again, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cauterization, or with a tickling one, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is slippery, and the patient is healed.
Chapter. XXVI.
Of the cauterization for the stomach.
When the stomach is coming out with fluid and the liquid is multiplying within it, and if you continue the ways of treatment and do not confirm it, then it is customarily said that the patient should be turned on his back, and extend your hands and your cushions, and then cauterize those three places: one place at the foot of the leg, for the quantity of a finger with a pointed cauterization, and two places at the sides of the feet of the leg, within the triangular form; and lengthen between those which are not adjusted so that they will be joined together.
And if the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the tongue.
And be the shape of the cauterization according to this form, six additions, And if you wish, cauterize with one large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is the form of a circle according to this form:
And cauterize the stomach pointedly at that which is frightened by this cauterization: and it is because you feel about the stomach with the quantity which you wish to feel, and then cauterize those points; and then clean those wounds which have come before them until they are cured.
Chapter. XXVII.
Of the cauterization for a fretted hand.
When pain in the hand comes from cold or moisture or great wind within it, and if it is getting away from its normal position by an excessive exit, then it is customarily said that the patient should be turned on his back, and feel about the hand with the quantity which you wish to feel, and then cauterize those three places according to this form: one place at the back of the hand above the knuckle, another between the two knuckles, and another between the knuckles and the wrist; and pass a little liquid on the surface of the hand.
And be the space between each cauterization according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cauterization according to the length of the right hand.
And do not apply the cauterization with a pointed instrument.
And if the quantity of water that has been added is more than half of the thickness of the tongue, and it is not adjusted again; and if the patient is lying on his back; and if he is not, then be sitting down, which already has extended its cushions, and raise its brasses.
You are able to cauterize those places with a tickling cauterization when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and let the thickness of all the tongue be added so that it reaches within the bowels, because the tongue here is thin; and know how to apply it.
Chapter. XXVIII.
Of the piercing of an abscess in the hand by cauterization.
When there is excitement or an abscess in the hand, and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the hand or in the skin of it, then if it is in the flesh of the hand, the patient will have a strong pain which will increase;
Then if it is in the skin of the hand, the pain will be very strong and often trouble your medicine.
Then turn the patient over on his back, and feel about the place of the abscess; and then apply the cauterization which has been described before in this book. And cauterize with that and cauterize within so that all the tongue is combined, within so that it reaches to the bottom, within so that it is healed in a fire.
And so you cure this one by curing the other pustules until it is healed.
And so you should not use this form of cauterization except for the one in which the study in the art of medicine is extended, and in whose case many bad diseases have been known; but some have experiented a little about it on this operation, but more you must not do so, and it is better.
Chapter .xxix.
On Cauterization of Wounds
They said that the ancient cauterization of wounds with a hot iron according to this method is useful, and it is this that you take from the hot iron of Aristotle's long dry hair, and that of its thickness.
And submerge that one in oil and dip it in the fire, and cauterize with a small cautery at the site between the continuation of the ribcage and the neck; and two small cauteries leave, one slightly declining on the side that is left with the beard, and two small cauteries in what declines between the fifth rib and the armpit, declining a little on the sides behind; and another cautery in your own place of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries in the sites behind; and one cautery in the site between the two sides of the foot.
And so you should not take your hand off the cauterization, but rather, it is in the work of the knot.
And so they have told me that there are some people who use a kind of cauterization with iron similar to fire, and place that one in the site between the ribs, until we come to that pustule and it is healed by itself, thus having said about the pustule of the foot.
But in this piercing there is no fear that it can happen so easily in the site of the fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter.xxx.
On Cauterization of the Wound.
When you treat the wound of the hand with water as we have said about the treatment in the division, and do not apply your own treatment to it, then cauterize it according to three ways, all of which are just, the first is that you make three cauteries or four depending on the length of the wound according to the shape of the cauterization of the foot, whose figure has preceded.
And be the thickness of a finger or a little more between each cauterization, and the way of making the cauterization is the way I have said about the cauterization of the foot, face to face.
And do not take your hand off the cauterization; and the patient is lying on his side.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two flames, which causes have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the knot which is in the end of the wound the blood comes out of the patient's left side.
And be your elevation to the one which you raise the knot according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations are made according to the thickness of the flesh.
Then insert the two flames, light it up, in that part which enters through those two holes the knot from the other side.
Then remove the cautery; and then there are four cauterizations.
And if you see that, cauterize with three flames.
Then cure the wound with a hot iron that has been burning for some days, because it is more certain than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter.xxxi.
On Cauterization of Droppings.
Cauterize not in droppings but rather in an acute pain.
When you treat the droppings with the ways of treatment we have said in the division, and do not apply your own treatment to it, then know that he cauterizes with four cauterizations around the navel and one above the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the hand, and two between the ribs, and one in the right side of the foot, and one on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the knot.
Then leave the cautery on for a long time that it gets hot.
And do not evacuate the patient of treatment just yet that they are added to his two remedies, and the third is added by a third remedy with a quick recovery through the help of God.
The form of the cauterization that is cauterized is clived according to the shape of this one previous to it, and this is with the shape in which it is cauterized on both sides according to its previous shape.
Chapter.xxxii.
On Cauterization of Feet and Toe Joints.
When the feet are aching and swollen with clear water, then know that you should cauterize them by making two cuts on either side of the foot near the big toe and a third cut between the second and third toes, raise your hand with the cauterization and do not twist it; then raise your hand, but do not return it to its place, because the clear water will drain.
This is the second form of cauterization: And so you make two cuts on each side of the foot near the big toe and a third cut between the second and third toes, and in each joint a cut with a small cautery. And be the cauterization according to the length of the joint: one on the outside and another on the inside at the middle of the joint, and two cauterizations in each joint.
Then leave the wound open that it can drain its own blood through the long treatment that it does not bleed any more.
Then you cure them with those causes we have said.
Chapter.xxxiii.
On Cauterization of Abdominal Wounds.
When abdominal wound is due to cold and wet that it destroys the vital essence and retentive essence which are in the stomach and intestines, then treat it with the ways of treatment we have said and do not apply your own treatment, and sometimes this wound suffers from a hot cauterization, then cauterize it with a large cauterization on top of the stomach according to what has preceded in the treatment of the stomach, a circular cauterization and four small cauterizations around the navel, a clived small cauterization; and one over the liver on the right side, or two.
And if the excess humidity and the mattress allow it, then cauterize the navel and the intestines, and firmly apply two cautery tools to the stomach and next to the groin, because this is a perfect cure for rejuvenating which there is no other.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of cauterizing ancient hemorrhoids.
When there are ancient hemorrhoids or a mass of thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are not cured by the treatment described in the previous chapter, then cauterize three times on the pus-filled spine of the two small and small triangular spondyl, and above the navel cut two dices.
And if you suspect that the patient's stomach is irritated and their food is not properly digested, and the face is sometimes bloated, then cauterize them on the stomach with a large cautery tool as described above; and with another cautery tool on the back, and with a third cautery tool on the abdomen below the rib cage, leaving the cautery tool in place for a while, and then treat the inside to be healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterizing athyma and removing them.
When you remove athyma, then hold the cautery tool that is assembled. Then place the lit fire in that athyma ablation and apply the patient' hand so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows out.
And make it one or two times, because if the holes are deep, then cauterize each one according to what we have described, and then treat them with water that soothes them from within to be healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery tool on the back, it is more effective for healing.
Chapter  .xxxvi.
De cauterizing fistulas that are formed in nature due to the mixing of different liquids.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of water, then heal them with cautery.
Therefore, when there is a fistula in nature due to ancient humors and corrupted moisture, then treat it with water that soothes it from the beginning of the fistula, and then remove the quantity of its depth using the above-mentioned subtle attempt.
Then hold the cautery tool that resembles a flame. Then place the lit cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it mixes with the subtle attempt.
And repeat on that cautery as many times as needed until the corrupt humors are burned up a few times or one or two or three times, depending on your need.
And beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the spine of the bladder or to the hernia, then beware of all those areas; and do not apply water unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it might penetrate.
And then treat the area so that it heals.
And if the area is sealed and the matter of ablation is removed from it, and it has been thus for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the matter is not taken from it by itself, then you will know that it is penetrating or going into the spine of the leg, or resulting from those causes whose memory will remain in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of cauterizing the breasts.
When there is pain in the breasts due to cold or strong wind, and because of this, the cow's milk becomes bitter, then treat them as follows: place a cautery tool on each breast, using a cautery tool with which you make holes, through which the memory remains.
And firmly cauterize them with a second small cautery tool, so that three linear cauterizations remain, and then apply more cauterization to the back to be healed.
Chapter  .xxxviii.
De cauterizing the bladder.
When there is pain in the bladder due to cold or moisture that causes the cow' milk not to be retained, then treat it as follows: place a cautery tool at the opening of the bladder on one side, where the spine begins, and cauterize it with a cautery tool on the right side, and with another cautery tool on the left side.
And make the length of each cautery tool according to the amount of the liquid in the bladder; and cauterize it with a cautery tool at the lower opening of the two, or with two cautery tools if necessary.
And apply a cauterization that is similar to the one described above.
Chapter .xxxix.
Of cauterizing the back.
When there is pain in the back due to cold or moisture, and because of this, the cows' milk becomes corrupted, and the heat of their bodies delays their calving, and there is a delayed occurrence of their pregnancy, and there is pain due to their movements, then treat them as follows: place three cauterization tools around the navel, just like we have described for the bladder; and on the lower part of the back, or two cauterization tools, and apply a cauterization tool that is similar to those described above.
Chapter  .xl.
Of cauterizing the dislocation of the ankle.
When moist air is spread at the opening of the ankle, and the cause of the swelling of its liquid is that the cow's foot is prolonged over the other when compared to each other. And the area of dislocation is turned in it as if it were a piece of meat.
Then treat the cow' foot on the opening of the ankle with a cautery tool that is similar to the one described above, and place it carefully so that the opening does not fall into its normal place.
And make the cautery tool mentioned above, which precedes the form in cauterizing the stomach.
And if this cautery is not suitable for you, then treat them with three large cauterization tools.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the bitterness of all the meat; and then treat it so that it heals.
Chapter   .xli.
Of cauterizing the sciatic vein.
When there is pain at the opening of the ankle and it is due to cold and moisture, then treat them with water that has been described above, which does not exist; and if it is ancient pain, then you will miss out on the humors, and if they are large, then treat them with rotten pills or artificial or similar ones; and then cauterize them.
And the way of cauterizing is according to two ways: or cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
The second is that you cauterize them on the back of the cow with three triangular cautery tools according to this shape; and make them a good depth. And make the space between each cautery tool the amount of its thickness, and if the cauterization tool is large or small.
A few times will be the cautery on the middle of the back of the cow over the shoulder blade to make four cauterizations.
If you wish, then treat them with the circle described above, which precedes the form in cauterizing the dislocation of the ankle, and make it a circular one that burns the bitterness of all the meat.
And this is the way to cauterize in the crotch when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend within the space of the crotch.
But if it extends within the crotch, then cauterize this two cauteries on the crotch above the place where you turn the patient that is the pain; and one cautery on the pelvic bone for four times a little more of the cervical region.
And if the knife cautery, and it is the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the severity of the wound.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends within the area proper, then cauterize this here where you turn the patient for three points or four or more if you want to of that.
And if the patient feels pain between their legs, then cauterize this here with a knife cautery.
And keep in all cauterization that you do not use the cautery on nerve endings or great nerves, and so to you it is about the patient's pain or unnecessary pain or restraint.
And you have already seen one of those whom I cauterized on the pelvic bone and finished in the cauterization, and the fire bed inflated within so that the tumor achieved the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted the whole foot. And then a very good solution for the stomach happened, and death came.
And if the pain is in two places together, then cauterize each according to this way.
And the wise ones said in the cauterization of the ankle cautery from which this is the way to do it: make a circle of iron like a ring whose circuit is most a palm; and should be deves the hole or opening according to the thickness of a date fruit or half a palm.
And inside that circle is another third; and is the distance between them the quantity of the knot of the finger; and let those circles be open from two sides; and is the length of those knots one or two, and make in those margins of iron nicely dressed in the circles; and this is the way of it:
Then set fire to it in the middle so that it grows red and gives off sparks, and place it over the ankle joint, the patient lying on its side. And then cauterize this with three cauteries rounded on a flat surface.
And then leave this one for three days; and apply ointment to this one with a bandage and let the wound be open for five days; and then heal this one by applying balm to it so that it is cured.
Albucasis said: Or son, of this kind of cauterization we have used little for the terror of looking at it, and for that reason few have found those who look up to it.
But some of these cauterizations will be found by those who suffered from them, and they will turn away from that place.
But the cauterizations with medicinal astringents are those that you make two circles with an armature pierced in which they should put the knot of the door of iron; and is the length of the parts in their thicknesses two knots or those.
And if the distance between them is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and are open above and below, and are so that they contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
And then place it over the ankle joint, the patient lying on its side, and compress your hand on the other ankle; and take a tail of water and pour it between those circles, and the quality of that one is with small fire little by little, and let that one endure for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the mordication and the itchiness of it — for such is the fire's itchiness — until the itchiness ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off the tail of water from all the ankle with double water.
And then leave this one for three days and put a bandage over it so that the itchiness remains red, and leave it for some more days, and run water over it, and this is the last of the cure.
And then heal this one by applying balm to it so that it is cured.
And if the pain extends within the crotch or the chest, then make a statue of it with water so that is held in the ankle' engagement.
And this is the way of the tail of water, and I have already written that one in the treatise of the correction of medicines. And take the alkaline and the non-extinct cause of both together a part, and cut them into pieces and place them in a new wave from which the part leaves is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters it.
And then leave the tail of that wave and take the alkaline and the lively water of double water for that one, and then, when you compress those two with your hand by good compression, and then let that one go from it to the wave that sends off the sharp water to the part left on the wavy wave.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it on the lively alkaline and another one, because that one is greatly increased by a strong fire, which is administered in small medicine doses and in cauterizations of other members, for the operation makes fire.
And of the medicines some that are cauterized with a broad sword, as it sharpens and grinds the dry ash and mixes them.
And Gualia told of a man of the arts the operation and the cure by which he was cured of ankle pain and sciatic pain, and he praised it greatly, saying that there was no need for another cure, and because it is healed by a full day such as it is hard to understand that one's work and his eyes are already dried up about that.
And it is that it be taken a very green leaf, and if it is not vertified, then take a recent fig; and the third is to be trissada with a little gray and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or in the crotch, or in the chest, and be looked at.
And leave it for the quantity of three hours or the quantity that the patient feels the itchiness of a little bit of pain.
And then put that one in the bath and then when the patient's body is hot, put that one in the water because the pain ceases and it is healed.
And you know that you do not need to use any cauterization with these medicines, but to eliminate the contents of the body.
But already Euclid said that when the goat's vein is tightened by a cut, then it is better to use iron; and the cauterization with this way: take wool and immerse it in old oil, and place it between the feet of the foot and between the pebbles.
And then take a dry goat's cut and inflame that one with fire so that it is carbonized; and then place that one over the wool and leave it until it is hardened. And then repeat it with water, and do not stop until the water' s spark reaches the ankle where the itchiness is felt, and leave that pain.
This way of cauterization is called cow's cauterization.
Chapter LII.
Of the Cauterization of Pain in Two Parts.
Some days' pain is in two parts because of two causes, as by accident or by piercing or by excessive elimination, and because of those that seem similar, by the introduction of rubbing matter and wetness.
And cauterization does not occur in any other species than this one, which is performed by spreading out the substance.
So then, when evacuating the patient's bowels and bladders, let them be filled with water that is made hot, which are to be applied to the two places where there is pain on a line according to their latitude, since you have five lines in total, three of them for the pain to go away quickly, one of them so that it does not come back and another so that it does not spread.
And cauterization is to be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauterizations by thrusting in medially according to this form:
Chapter LII.
On the cauterization at the beginning of giddiness.
You can recognize this malady in small children; and it is necessary to be careful about the beginning of it, since if it affects their skeleton it can cause a lot of damage to their structure by raising the joints and movements.
And you will see in the last vertebra of the back and the neck that it has already begun to rise above the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cauterization according to this form: so that the cauterization is applied evenly around the entire vertebra.
And if you want, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, two or three lines. So that the points are close to each other.
Then clean the area thoroughly with water, which we have mentioned.
However, be careful that cauterization is not administered in giddiness, which is caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter LIV.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, if gout of a friction cause is treated with care and not relapsed into pain, then the repeated cauterizations will be unnecessary.
This is because you cauterize the evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot with a certain number of cauterizations.
And let it be made with an olive oil cauterization, whose form is this:
And if it is necessary that points be made on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains persist and spread to the other joints, and they are getting worse, then cauterize each joint with three or four cauterizations in total using this olive oil cauterization method.
And if you find that these cauterizations are not enough, then cauterize it without pressing too hard on the hand with the cauterization before and after, only by applying it to the surface of the foot.
And if the pains persist in the hand and the second joint, then administer the cauterization we mentioned in the previous chapter.
And if the pains only affect the last joint and it is called "suagra", then make points in the circle of the joints as they rotate, making two lines.
And if the pains persist in the fingers, then make points in the circle of the joints on each finger and on the thumb's knuckle.
And if the pains persist in any of the fingers or in the thighs or legs, then cauterize each one completely.
And do not evacuate the bowels if they are not regular or if they do not receive medicines properly; because if it is done well and the fever is evacuated with this cauterization, God will help you.
Chapter XLV.
On the cauterization of broken bones.
When there is a fracture in the thigh bone and the intestines come out in front of the abdomen, and it has just begun to move, then cover it with a cloth so that it does not hurt; let it rest for three days, and use gentle treatment to prevent any pain or injury.
Then follow the patient' back between your legs on their back, and command them to keep their back warm; so that the intestines do not move or show, or the bowels come out.
Then return it to its place with the help of a staff, and try to break it at the end of the spine where it joins the rib cage; so that it is similar to a half circle split in two.
Then light the cauterization with this form:
In a place where it is warm, and it gives off a strong odor of smoke. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient' thighs and placed a cushion under them; some servants should be on hand to help with their legs, and another to assist with their feet, making sure they are comfortable.
Then place the cauterization on that mark with your right hand while holding it to the left, and let it be done quickly; so that the bone of the thigh is joined together in the middle by two joints, and repeat this process if it does not work in the first place.
Observe carefully during cauterization to ensure that the intestine does not burn, so that there is no death or other great misfortune.
And you know that when you do not have the bones, your work is not complete.
Then let the cauterization of children be subtle according to their age and size.
Then clean the area of the cauterization for three days so that it does not cause a recurrence of the fever.
Then clean them all with water to heal them.
Let the patient rest on their back for 40 days, keeping them warm and protecting them from illness.
Then provide food according to the length of time for the cure; so that the abdomen does not swell and the intestine is not burned by effort in healing.
Then when they are ready to be taken away after 40 days, do so with care; and keep them for another 40 days.
And be careful in your work and in the consumption of food and drink; for it is through this whole treatment that healing will come.
Then examine the other fractures in the abdomen, and if they are not adjusted, then cauterize them with a circular cauterization according to their quantity, and so that it does not hurt. And let it be cleaned with water, which we have mentioned, and not adjusted.
And already some say that the first fracture should be cauterized with a triangular cauterization according to this form, since it is marked in three places:
And the line is placed at a third of the way up from the bottom because it is marked in three places: above and below the fracture, and a third point between them; and the first cauterization is made with a pointed cautery, which is easier and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the cauterization of twisted bones.
When there is pain in the limbs from a blow or a beating and it persists for a long time, and you do not provide relief with medicines; then cauterize with a pointed cauterization.
And let the cauterization of each member be done according to its size and age, and its strength and flexibility; and the location of the twisted pain and the kind of pain it causes.
Therefore if the first cauterization is effective, it is good; and if not, repeat it, for it is customary with those pains that they are punctures of a member to that which approaches him from behind by means of which we may achieve what you need to do the cauterization while the patient is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
On the cauterisation of leprosy.
Some leprous diseases are greatly improved by a strong cauterisation, and mildly so if the cause of the leprous disease is putrefaction from fire or melancholy.
And so, if you wish to cauterise that, consider whether the leprosy is more severe or not and treat it with those things which we have said in the chapter; do not stop, nor does the patient's whole body and complex fear you; then cauterise that on top of the head with two cauters: one at the base of the hairline, and a second behind it, at the crown of the head; and both on either side; and one behind, on the neck or collar.
And last, with your hand on the cauterisation a little while within the bone to produce a slight contraction, and thus the scabs are removed, so that the exhale of thick vapours is relieved from him; and cauterise on the foot as necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the whole body and appears clearly, then consider that you cauterise that with those cauterisations which we have said in the head; and cauteris on the tip of the nose, and two on either cheek, and two on the two shoulders of the neck, and one on the collarbone, and a large one near the collarbone, and one on the chest, and two on the knees, and one on each ankle, and two on each leg, and two on the Achilles tendons of his feet; and cauteris all the joints of his limbs and feet, and on the heels of his feet, and the folds of his clothes.
And keep away from the nerves which are above the bone that you do not burn those.
Some are cauterised with one cauterisation on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the fistula.
And know that the more you apply cauterisations, the more it is rejuvenated and confirmed; and know that leprosy does not feel pain in cauterisation, but the body does feel stupor because of it.
Then consider that the cauterisations are many or few according to the limbs and joints, since they are preceded by the spices of the instruments.
Then bring the cauterisation with eructation bread, molted meal, and another cure within it while it is healed.
Chapter.xlviii.
On the cauterisation of stupor.
When any member is shaken or asleep and is not healed with medicines, oils, and plasters, then you should cauterase the shaken member according to the size of the limb or the age of the person.
And let that be the main cauterisation that enters the essence of the bond a little while. Then bring that with dung within it while it is healed.
And some are cauterised with that stupor which goes to the limbs and feet, and at the shoulders of the neck, and the nerves that move that member; and it returns with stupor.
No further proceed on this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.
Chapter.xlix.
On the cauterisation of scars that are formed.
When scars are old and do not confer with any of the medicines, then you should cauterise on it with a small cauterisation according to the amount of the essence of the bond within it while the whiteness and colour of it is changed, and the colour of it is modified.
Then bring that with eructation bread and lentils, with rozene oil and arnica leaves, and holy water or st. John's wort, each a little, and all mixed together, and place a cloth over the area and leave it for healing.
Chapter.l.
On the cauterisation of sores.
When cancer begins and you wish to turn that, then cauterise it with a circular cauterisation along its course as it turns.
And the wise said that it should be cauterisised with the last cauterisation in its place; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it is ulcerated, and I have seen it a few times.
And it is better to cauterise it in its course with a circular cauterisation or a few cauterisations as we have said, or a single one.
Chapter.li.
On the cauterisation of pustules.
When any pustule is delayed in maturity and thus comes out through excessive sweating or by age, since it is old in decay, of little strength, or by time, and you wish to hasten its maturity; then cauterisise it along its course with a small number of cauterisations, and leave it, for it will quickly mature.
But if you wish to pierce it with a cauterisation, then consider this way to do it: and place that in the middle of the pustule while piercing it with the cauterisation; and leave it.
And if you place the cauterisation in that spot which is placed on the arm, so that the whole body of the arm is relieved; then bring that within it while it is healed.
Chapter.lii.
On the cauterisation of corrosion.
Corrosion is ambulant corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as it eats dry wood with fire.
Then if you can find the location of that corrosion and it suffers fire cauterisation with a few small cauterisations, and many according to that spot where it is corrosion.
Then cauterise that entirely, removing all corrosion, and do not leave any cause of it remaining.
Then leave that for three days, and place a cloth over the cauterised spots, mixed with three parts of oil while all the corruption is completely eradicated and all the corrosion is gone.
Then bring that with dung containing milk within it.
But if after three times the meat is born healthy and there is no corruption, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cauterisation on that which is corrupted in the areas where it is decayed.
Corrosion is cured with some herbs with acute medicines, since that is half a treatment instead of cauterisation. But cauterisation with fire is much better.
And it has already said that the cure of it with acute medicines in the division, and so take that which you will give to him when he is in need.
Chapter.liiii.
On the cauterisation of claws and of other similar things.
Some are caused by the split of the nail which is called claw, and it is a gross cause, and that splits, and cauterise it according to two ways: one is cauterisation with fire, and another is cauterisation with water, or a tail.
But cauterisation with fire is that you ignite the cauterisation which resembles the flickering of a torch, and it is made of iron according to the amount of the claw from the beginning, and it is very thin in width.
And then place that spark on the knuckle, and then move your hand with cautery around the knuckle until the cautery reaches the depth of the knuckle. And let it rest for three days before it begins to swell. Then apply a paste made of dried sage leaves, and let the paste remain on it for a night, as this will remove its roots.
Then heal the wound with a salve of healing ointment until it is healed.
If they are not converted, and blisters occur on the surface of the body, mostly on the feet, then prepare a small amount of water with some salt or iron or a piece of stone, and place it on the knuckle; then pour a little bit of water onto that compress from your hand, and let your hand rest on it, and then turn the compress upside down and squeeze the water into the knuckle's root, and then wait for the patient for an hour, and then remove it, as the knuckle will be healed with its roots.
Then apply this to all of them until they are all gone throughout the body.
Then heal the blisters that the roots of the knuckles have been eradicated with water from the healing ointment that the flesh generates.
Chapter III.
Of cauterization for tremors.
When this tremor occurs from rubbing on the nerves or from fever due to rubbing or from a similar cause, then prepare that it is cauterized with four cauterizations or with five over the spine of two, with one cauterization between each spine; and with a cauterization on the feet, and on the abdomen, and with an olive cauterization.
And that tremor of the patient will cease and speed up the healing of the fever.
Chapter L.
Of cauterization for accidental injuries to the body.
When in the body white blisters occur and pus-filled holes are formed by corrupt materials, then at the beginning of their appearance, let it be cauterized with a subtle fire on the tip of an awl, or with a long razing cut, or with a slow cauterization.
And some blisters are opened with cauterization at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not painful, and the excess fluid is removed by doing so, and it heals from them.
But especially let water be prepared for the evacuation with bloodletting.
Chapter LVI.
Of cauterization of a flow of blood from an injury by piercing with an arrow.
If there is a flow of blood due to an injury that has caused the plague to spread, or due to a burst blister or a wound in the member, and then similar things occur, and it is difficult to repair it.
Then if there is a little bit of blood, prepare a cushion with your hand at the arrow's orifice, and let it rest on it so that the blood does not flow down from the point; and do not allow it to run out.
And then place a small and large olive cauterization on the fire, and exhale over them until they are lit up.
Then take from them a small or a large according to the injury and the plague at which the artery has been broken, more quickly than if you were to wait for the point to stop moving, and then cauterize it until it is finished; and let the cauterization be close to where the blood comes out.
And if the blood flows from the artery's orifice while you are holding the point and exhaling the cauterization, then take another cauterization that is prepared with cauterizations on the fire, and then do not stop doing this; and let the cauterization be close to where the blood comes out.
And keep in mind that you don't burn the nerve that is here, and that something else does not occur on the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it with cauterization, and even more so when the artery is large, unless in four ways: either by cauterizing as it is said to be done, or by extracting before it is extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of the patient get burned and the blood is stopped; or that it is bound with a rope or a ligature by a strong tension, or that it is placed on medicine whose virtue stops the blood; and they are strangled with the pillow with a constriction.
But that which administers a gentle restriction of the patient with a ligature and with a constriction of the cloth or by position due to fire or similar causes, does not do anything good.
But if there is a little bit of blood, and it is not the medicine that has been presented or the medicine itself, then open the point of the incision on the vein in such a way as to have said above, and understand the great constriction of the patient within which the blood stops from spreading, and over the arrow with fire sprayed in such a way that the injury heals and thickens; and also burn the skin where cauterization or medicine is needed.
Of incision and piercing and of bloodletting and of plagues and of their appearances.
I have spoken in the first chapter about all the disease of fever when cauterization with fire and medicine are necessary, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments that are useful for cauterization; and I have ordered the chapters of the second part within the feet.
And I will speak in this chapter according to that doctor's way, so that what he wants is obtained, then on it that the patient asks for.
Before I start speaking here, know that this is for the patient's fear what was spoken about in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for the patient that caution is necessary, because in the operation described in this chapter blisters occur from the injury or from an eruption on the skin or from the removal of blood through a vein or incision on the blister or opening of a wound or similar things. And all of them are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in addition to that is death.
And I warn you that on you this does not happen, because some blisters occur from the injuries of men in a way similar to how they get sick. And of them is some that runs away to their own disease and is killed by its violence; and the length of their disease is fear, which means death.
And those are the ones that give you peace and quiet, and you expect them to be healthy, and their disease is destructive.
And therefore I do not consent to that which sees you in this way; and your caution should be greater than caution, and your haste less; and do not presume on any cause over it unless it is a certain knowledge that certifies it as yours, and the following praise-worthy.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases by diagnosis and indication, because in it is saved health, for in this is your help in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, son, God blesses you with wisdom, for he has placed you in his care.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters as it follows in the chapter of cauterization, from the care of the head to the feet, so that it may be easy for you from there and from which you need it.
Chapter one.
Of the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this hernia is seen in children when the birth takes place and when the child's head is lifted up.
And some are hidden because of a cloudy cause which is not understood.
May I not seen this disease except in children; and all those that I have seen die, and for this reason it is a wonderful work in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head always remained too big for him to be able to hold it up because of its size, and more than the moisture increased inside him until death came upon him.
And this moisture or is added between the cheek and the ear, or is added behind the ear, over the bone.
For the operation in that if the moisture is between the cheek and the ear, and the swelling is little, then you should cut in the middle place of the head as if there were a crack in the depth, and let it run on two sides within which runs the moisture, and this is the form of the pimple:
And so if the moisture is increased and the swelling is greater, then there are two cracks according to this method:
And if the moisture is behind the ear, then it is a sign that you open the lips of the head completely and squeeze out the water when you press them from within, and it does not remain in your mouth. Then you should cut in the middle place of the head according to this method:
And take out all the moisture; and strengthen the cracks with wool and plasters; and pour oil from above on to it for five days, and then remove the bandage and cure the swelling with herbs and ointment, and strengthen the head with equality; and eat dry food of little moisture within so that the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another way of cutting which you consider proper for the size of the swelling and the collection of water, because some are greater on the back of the head, or on the left side, or on the right; and so cut where the swelling and the filling of water appear, and pour it out according to how easy you can do it.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, and let the blood flow freely from the wound because of the flow of water.
Chapter two.
When there is a cough or a fever in the chest or in the foot, and it is old, do not apply medicines to it, but last of all, apply the cure by cutting those two arteries.
And then cut when you want to cut the head of the patient, and rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and make strong the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and the places on each side of the ears are wrinkled, and hidden except in certain men.
And so examine the vein, and cut each one with a pimple from each side of the head towards the ear, and let it run for the depth of the head;
And if you want to, insert the knife behind the artery, and take it from the side that is cut.
And the length of the incision should be two inches apart because when a vein is cut, the pulse beats frequently, and it would stop if cut.
May the artery not be felt when you measure the distance from the ear, because then take three inches of space between them, and examine it; and let it run into the bone.
And that is enough to cut a quantity of blood worth four pints. And it is strong enough to run in the blood of him; and this is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the filling up of the artery.
And consider the swelling, and if there is any cause of the bone, then cut it out in order not to cause swelling.
And strengthen the swelling with wool and a bandage of cloth, and cure it with ointment within so that it is healed.
Chapter three.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are placed in the temples.
When there is an emigrant headache or a pulsating one, because of the herbal moisture and because of its quality in the temple veils, or it is violent and similar to those, and it is medicated with the methods of medication of herbs and water, but you do not benefit them, then we turn to these diseases by extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing those.
And the way of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient cuts his hair which is in the temples; because it is shown by the pulse of the temple, for it is revealed by the pulse of the head, and it is hidden except in a few men because of its speed.
And if you are hidden, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water so that the artery appears clearly to you. Then take the pimple in which this is the form: And then you should cut the cheek with ease so that you can reach the artery; and pull it forward and extract that from the sides independently within which you remove those from the cheeks and discover those from the veils which are left behind.
May the artery be thin, then wrap it with the end of the bone, and cut each one from that part according to the size so that the ends are lengthened and the flow of blood is stopped because if they were not cut, the blood would not rise.
And last of all, evacuate the blood from four pints. From two to three.
And if the artery is large, then cut it in two places with a strong thread of silk or a cord that does not break, and do not let it get rotten before the swelling is healed and the flow of blood stops.
And cut the excess which is between two bandages; and do it at that hour or at another.
And if you want to, cauterize it with a knife within the bone so that the ends are cut, and keep this work in place.
And it is better work than that the patient has fever or is in a cold state of body; because cauterization is of those causes that help to end the moisture, and so it is better for healing.
And so extract the arteries which are in the back of the neck, and place it on a clean cloth, and let it dry well, and cure it with dry medicines to keep the flesh from rotting and to make the blood flow within so that it is healed.
And if while opening another wound in the groin there is an escape of blood from the ligature, then you tie up that blood loss or cauterize it or plug up the hole, and tighten your hand within such that it is restrained by the bandage. And if for some reason that does not exist in you, then stop the bleeding by holding it in place until the wound has healed, and plug up the hole with water of a violent coldness until the pain subsides, and strengthen it as necessary to avoid the risk of infection.
And if the blood is coming out of the ligature, then you cauterize the vein with two sharp tools, pushing them together, and pausing each time, lighting a fire, until it reaches the bone and splits the vein in two places, so that blood can flow between the extremities, since they are not joined together by this cauterization.
This is the method of cauterizing:
And let the two tools be sharp. However, if the sharpness of the two tools is weak, then two sharp tools are better, because they do not cut the flesh with great speed.
Therefore, in those places where there is some thickness, the fire's heat should be applied gently so that the flesh is not wounded.
This work is better in all works and done more lightly.
And be the space between the two tools the quantity of the thickness of the wound.
I capitulate.
Of the treatment for acute and acidic wounds of the joints.
When the acute and acidic pain is in the joints of the neck, which protrudes from the top of the head, and there is no reason for medical treatment, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and it feels like it is on fire, and the joints hurt so much that their hair is damaged, and their eyelids are burned by the bitterness of the tears, the ancient remedies for treating such a procedure, and they do not benefit from those treatments.
And you order the servant to shave the hair from the forehead quickly, and make three cuts evenly spaced out according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the cut falls in two ways: the first cut is evenly spaced out to the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second cut is according to the length of a small piece of string that hangs from the lacrimal, and the third cut is on the other side.
And guard against the incision of the ligatures that are in two places, and stretch your hand out from the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space between each cut is three times the length of a thread.
And if you have a dry sponge or dried sheets that are useful for drying out the wound.
Then introduce the sharp extremities of the sponge, and this is the shape of the incision: which begins at one temple and ends at the second incision. Exorcise all the tissue between two cuts, leaving a strip that is over the bone, and then make a small incision at one end of this strip, continuing into the second incision. Then hold the sponge and enter it into the first incision again, or another tool called a knife, which is held on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the ligature of that flesh attached to the bone, and let it drop over the strip, and cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the joints.
However, if the incision needs to be continued after the strip has been cut off, and then make a small incision in the middle of the strip, and continue it into the other incision.
And then, if blood comes out of the wound in a large quantity, squeeze the pressure points on the feet of the tightened wound.
Then place a small piece of cloth on each cut, and place the powder that is mixed with blood, oil, and vinegar, and wet it so that it does not cause a puss.
And on the third day, release the joint and give a large infusion of water, wine or rosewater, and then treat it with bazilic oil or rosewater, and other things until the blisters are healed.
I capitulate.
Of the treatment for coughs and joints that descend from the openings inside the head.
When there is an acute cough and it continues, and sometimes the patient's joints become very painful, and their eyelids are swollen and sore, and in the preon of the head there is a sharp pain and an unusual discharge, then know that these accidents only come from the inside of the head.
And the best treatment for such things is this: order the servant to shave the forehead, and make a cut in the middle of the forehead, a small amount according to its length (and begin the cut at the left temple, ending at the right temple; and make the cut over the bone; and stretch your hand out from the mandibles that are useful for chewing, as far as the exposed bone).
Dry all the wound with a sponge or dried cloth, and then fill in the space between the two lips of the wound with a thin strip of cloth or cloth. Then place a small amount of the powder that is mixed with blood, oil, and vinegar on it, so that it does not cause a puss.
And when the pus has decreased and you see that it is starting to dry up, then know that you should make a paste of flour and water in equal parts, and add four parts of perfumed oil, and make it into an ointment and apply it to the blisters as if you were making a dough.
I capitulate.
Of the treatment for water that drips in the ears.
Any cause that drips in the ears is one of four spices, because it is either mineral and similar to salt, or lead and like, or plant and similar to nettle, or fava, or fluid and similar to water, oil, and vinegar, or from any animal.
And when salt drips in the ear or another similar cause to those causes that do not fit, and hold the ear to the sun, and if the salt drops, then distill it into oil of violets or cumin, and then administer the infusion to it, and make it cough gently, and pour the spit onto the wall with care. Then place some cloth or wool around the ear, and stretch the ear to the sun, because the cause of drooping is due to these causes.
And if it does not drop, then administer the infusion with the tool called a gentle squeeze, and this is the shape:
If it drops with a squeeze, that is good; otherwise, administer the infusion with a handful of soft clay.
And if it does not drop with water, then make a tube of Aram and insert the end into the canal of the ear, and plug it with wax and softened oil, so that it is not too large but just right for the tube. And then extract them from me with a strong grip, for ten fingers full of water that I have counted.
Maybe if it is not foreseen in this way, then take a ring-plunger or a suitable apparatus and press a small quantity, and pause that at the end of the ray, and wrap that around that corner decently paused. And then insert that in the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from the moisture.
And if it is not foreseen in any of the ways that we have counted, then you should cut off that which has formed an abscess or spasm at the front.
And the way to cut that off is that you start by cutting the blood vessel at its beginning and then extract it from there according to the virtue of the ring, and then make that hole between your fingers, and then turn the ear towards the sides, and then insert a small knife in the hole at the root of the ear, greasing it with oil. And if the hole is of the shape of the moon and penetrates into the ear, and when the ear is blocked, block that with an appropriate instrument; and then sew up the hole in that position quickly, and cure that inside so that it is healed.
And if the cause is caused by fat that you eat and it swells up, then administer the cure and extract it; but if you do not obey your doctor's orders and instead take a thin spit according to this form: and then administer that fat which has fallen in the ear.
And do not pour water when you think that it is already moist with the vapor of the ear, and pause that in small pieces, and then extract those by the fingers or by a small instrument, or by cutting off as said have, because it is relieved to extract it.
Maybe in the water that is entered into the ear it happens that the patient uses a sneeze at the beginning, and he fills his ear with a small amount of hay, and then hits that ear with a few pieces of hay, and if by water it is foreseen, it is good; and otherwise, then take two sharp pieces of hay according to the length of the said, and burn those pieces slightly, and let the patient insert one of those pieces in his ear, and then he jumps on the floor a little with that piece in his ear, and then hit that ear with another piece of hay over the part that has fallen out. Then do not stop pouring water until all the water is foreseen.
Then do not stop pouring water until all the water is foreseen. And then pour the water again as if you were to take paper or a piece of gauze, that is to say, and then put one end in the ear and stretch the other end towards the fire until it is completely burned.
Then put the other one and pour water repeatedly until all the water is foreseen, and then insert that with a cannula as said has been extracted.
Maybe in the extraction of a beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then pour water and wash it as said has been divided; but if it is a large thing that causes pain to the head by means of wind, then administer the extraction with a sharp instrument or with a knife, and that of the beast is lighter than all the other causes that cause pain in the ear.
Maybe in the extraction of vermen that is generated in the ear, when you administer water to extract it as said has been divided and in the book of distillation, and do not give your cure, then look at the ear towards the sun.
And if here appears any cause of the vermen, then extract that with a sharp instrument or with a small knife, but if there does not appear any cause, then take a cannula which is wide at the end and narrow at the beginning, and this is the form of it: and then insert the narrow end in the ear according to the quantity that it suffers pain, and then suck it strongly with a firm suction, and pour water repeatedly, so that all the vermen are foreseen.
And if you do not obey your doctor' orders and instead take a piece of wax according to what has been said, then administer the distillation processes that have already been mentioned in the cure of worms, and then pour water in the distillation process.
And be your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, and this is its form: and then make that of silver or bronze, wide at the end, so that there is a small hole at the top.
And if it is necessary to cover that with wax here, where it is necessary to fill in the cavity of the cannula to prevent it from flowing. And if you want, take the ring and wrap it around the end with care; and then pour the oil into the cavity of the ear, or suck juice from any herb, or water that you want of these medicines in the cannula — and this is in the ear, which is in the hole — and then put the ring on it with a quick compression to prevent the oil from escaping into the cavity of the ear, and feel the oil inside.
And that water which is already poured in the ear has been slightly burned with fire. and be sure that the cause that you will distil in the ear is not too much burned, for the ear does not suffer water.
Chapter VII
Of Cure for Ear Aching.
Some times the belly of the old is not pierced by the nail, and then it happens in some men that an ache appears in the meat of the ear because of wind or for nothing; and this ache sometimes is caused by piercing the ear with a pin, and sometimes it is caused by the sides being apart.
And that which happens in the meat of the ear, which does not understand the wind, is in difficult situations for healing.
And in that which you obtain the wind, be sure to pause the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it. And if there is a good opportunity, open that with a small knife whose form is as follows:
If the end of it is small in width, and one part is sharp and the other is not; and the knife is two-edged so that it does not cut the ear.
And if the ache is caused by hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of it, then take that with a small knife and cut it with great ease so that all the flesh is removed.
And if the ache is in the hole of the ear, then take a small sharp knife and burn that slightly with fire, and then insert that in the meat of the ear.
And if you smell a good opportunity with water that the patient gains by ease, try to press it by ease; and be sure not to trouble the nerves of the ear.
Then pause in the ear a strip of linen according to the width of the hole that you wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and pour water for a few days so that you are sure of the consolidation of the ache; or take some and sprinkle it on dry leaves and use it; and if the ear is already swollen, then be sure to destroy the strips and change them with others that you wrap in wax that is made with rose oil, so that the swelling of the aching stops; and then cure that inside so that it is healed.
If, however, there is a flow of blood, then submerge the sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter .viii.
On the treatment of an azil that should be applied to the eyelids.
Athel that should be applied to the eyelids of the patient: some are wet, and some are dry.
Then you have those that should be warm or cool: and scrape off those hairs from the area, and place a hot cloth over the area in three places.
If there is a pain that blood flows from, then you should cauterize those with a small, delicate cautery.
And the best cauterization is to return those cuts and scrapes when there is still a cause of their hairs; and when they are cauterized with fire, those hairs are burned and do not return.
Chapter .ix.
Treatment for a large wound that is on the eyelids of the patient.
A wound on the eyelids of the patient: some cause that is gathered into a mass in its strength and toughness, and thus it grows larger, and therefore it is called large.
And it is an addition of thick moisture on the lower eyelid and above it.
Then the operation in detail is: if the size is increasing above and beyond the eyelid, and it spreads out widely; and the cause of this is slight.
Then open that with a sharp instrument by its width, and remove that from all parts with ease, and suspend that with an ointment, and cut off that.
And if the size is large, then you adjust it with sutures: and treat that so that it heals.
And if it is small, then you will not have any trouble with that wound because its blood restores it and heals it.
And if the large size is declining towards the center of the eyelid inside, then open the lid and suspend that large size with an ointment, apart from the incision, and press it from all parts; and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, then there is no need to go any further because it will not cause a problem.
And as for the incision, wash the patient's body with saltwater; and treat the wound with water that heals it so that it heals.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment of an aching eye on the upper eyelid of the patient.
Achornath is when it is born in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mainly it affects children: it causes them to cry tears of bitterness because they cannot look at the light of the sun; and they cannot see clearly because of this.
And so you have to look constantly at their faces all the time, and they sleep with their eyelids wet because of tears: and, in their upper eyelids, there are eyebrows covered with swelling, and the appearance of pain seems to be close to them; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a sharp pain within them.
And there is a way to operate in which the patient holds his head in the hand and places it on a cloth; and you place a cloth over him and a little bit of pressure, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains arthenach all at once, and place that over the area and press it with your fingers so that sharp pain is felt in the middle of the circle, and then open it in the middle of that moisture with a sharp instrument that cuts through its width, and the wound does not exceed what is made in flabotomy.
If, however, you do not have the equipment ready: because in its various positions you operate arthenach by a wound according to the shape of white blotchiness.
Then take that with the cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers, and turn it over from one side to another quickly so that it is ripped apart.
And be careful not to pierce the area with the point of the instrument because its moisture does not reach the patient's body and it is rejected by him.
If, however, you have not yet observed the appearance of arthenach at the beginning of the wound: rather, you should place a cloth with ease in the wound so that it is removed by it; and then take it out: and then dip the cloth in water and see grass, and place it on the area, and sprinkle some dust.
And then pour salt over that: and place it in the depression of the wound so that water that is left from that moisture.
And then treat that area so that it heals.
If, however, a fever breaks out in the area: then treat that with plasters made of mint, so that it heals.
Chapter 11.
On the ways to test for fever.
When the eyelids of the patient are red by their natural appearance and wrinkled, then open your eyes to the heat and produce ways for fever: such as if it is caused by fire, which is called fire-touching, and treat it with four methods: either by fire, or with acute medicine, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suturing, or with reeds, according to sight.
And then place the patient' head in his hand and turn his eyelids toward you, and if they turn: it is good; and if not, pierce that with a sharp needle at the point where they should be turned upward from the eyelid, and let the needle go through it — close to the edge of the eyelid — and close to the hairs, and pull the hair up above the eyelid, and turn that back toward you.
And then turn the eyelid inside out by its hairs, and place a small piece of cloth or a needle on it, and tie it: and then turn that over with your fingers, and see if there is a figure like a leaf of mint.
However, sometimes it is the opposite: because the amount of air that enters through the eye is different in each person, because there are those who have their eyelids opened by a large quantity, and this causes them to open their eyes more; and there are those whose eyelids are closed tightly by a small amount.
And then open it with the point of the needle between the two lines that you have drawn, and start from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor. If your wound is wide as the hair is natural: because it is the size of a king.
And then place an ointment in one of the angles of the cloth, and scratch that completely; and adjust the two sides with a small, fine thread, and wipe the blood, and make it adhere to some hair on the eyebrows for a few causes, if you want to do so, and if not, do not worry about it.
And then leave the threads to heal within three or four days, and then treat that wound.
If you want to: leave the stitch in place, and treat that with water that dries it out and hardens it because the eyelid is raised by the seal of the wound and the addition of it; however, if the stitch comes out: then say these words about the medicine.
But when it is on top of the patient, it is a good operation and not in fear.
And another way to tie it is that you hold on top of the eyelid with such a thread, and pull up the eyelid with three separate and gathered threads according to this form:
If it is not possible there, hold the nails, and if it does not close, take a needle with thread in it and put it into the middle of the figure, and stick the other thread on top of the major tear, and the second thread according to the smaller tear, and adjust between these threads to make them equal, and then lift them up with your hand with an upward bend: lift all the string
Then adjust the two eyelids with stitches, and heal the cut inside that is healed.
If it happens that the swelling has formed a scar or a crack, then put on it a balm and something similar to it, and moisten it.
And some eyes also to the eyelid that their pupils are turned in, then when you use that which we have said of stitches; but stitches on each are more artificial.
Do not tie the string with a knot, according to this form: and that you rotate the eyelid and cut the figure inside according to what I have said; and then with art make two needles or two thin wires of which length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is less than the width of the spine: Then you have already cut into the ends of any splits, where you have the strings.
Then add to it a little bit of the thread that is extra on top of the eyelid, and tighten the needles on each split with a very tight knot, and leave it for some days, because the string through the tightness will die away and rot.
If it is delayed, then break it off with a tweezers, and heal the wound inside that is healed.
So when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised, and the hair does not poke.
And this is the form of two needles that you will make according to this form: and there is no quantity of length or width more or less.
Chapter 12.
Of raising hair on the spine with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hair is unnatural, hard and sharp on the spine, then the operation in it is that you take a very thin needle and pause it on the string of a very thin silk, and then adjust the ends of it and tie each one with a very small knot: And be the length of the strings of the quantity of a palm.
Then you make another very thin string and cross it over, and tie the ends of that one if you want to.
Then place the patient's head on the table with his face down, and bring the operation to a good conclusion, because it is a delicate and small operation.
Then insert the needle into the root of the hair with care and attention, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid, removing that from the natural hair.
Then pull the hair out of its root and introduce that into the eye, and be the hair one or two or three or no more than that.
Then pull your hand away from it so that the hair comes out of its root into the eye, with the hair attached to the eyelid with the natural hair.
If it is pulled out from the eye and not pulled out with the hair, you will pull out from the split ends with the thread that you have put on it, within which the hair will be pulled out from above.
Then you will see the spine clearly, because then you will pull out from the eye and the thread, and tighten each one and close it for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows over it.
If it is too loose, then you adjust a long hair of the natural hair, and raise that one, or what you leave within that space, and then you raise it.
Chapter 13.
Of the treatment of a bump on the eyelid.
When there is a bump in the spine and it is hard to close the eyelid when it closes on both sides by bad consolidation of the wound or by sectioning or cauterizing, and this is called leporine, and that one is either natural or accidental, and is done for the consolidation of the wound or by sections or cauterization, or by a similar shape to those with which it does not agree.
Then the way of doing the operation is that you split those consolations and separate the eyelids, and pause them between those a piece of cloth of linen, and tie them together so that they are healed.
And do not use any cure for the causes that dry out, because if you make water return to be swollen, it is better than nothing and does not burn when it comes into contact with the fire.
Then use on that bump of causes that soften with fenugrec, and dip in the water which is hot and salty and similar to it, or rub aquilon, which is made liquid with some oils, and dip it in that water, and heal it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you make perfect those consolations that are not consolidated according to the form that comes into contact with fire at the beginning.
And this operation that we have described is nothing but a correction of cauterization that does not return to the shape of the wound according to how it comes into contact with fire at the beginning.
Chapter 14.
Of the treatment of a bump on the eyelid.
This cauterization that is done on the eyelid below, which is called specifically only when it is done on the side of the eye and not in other places, and it is either natural or accidental.
May be accidental due to a wound, sectioning, cauterizing, or similar shapes.
And the way of doing the operation is that you take a needle with a double thread, and make it pass from the tear duct on the left side to the tear duct on the right side, within which the thread comes to the ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh with the needle and draw it through both ends with the needle, and cut it with a wide knife. Then if the eyelid returns to its place as it should, then do so; but if not, take the string and pause it in the middle of the split, and adjust the eyelids so that the two splits are at the ends of the eyelid.
And make the ends of the two splits at two angles of the incision, which is done so that they meet, and let them be done so that when they are gathered together they form a figure.
And this figure is Greek letter: Lambda.
Then stretch that flesh by the quantity that is the width of the eyelid on both sides, which holds the eyelid closed.
Then adjust those separated parts and cut them with a thread of wool, and heal those with water that we have said about the softening medicines and with salt within that is healed.
If the cauterization is done in a crack or stitch or cauterizing, then you have to split that flat crack on top of the eyelid according to what came before it. And separate the hair from between the two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the speech of the cure of alcohol if it is dry or left, that runs in it operation, according to which is prepared in the form of alcohol, and that is in a form of various particles.
And the artisans know at all times how to prepare it in any way that is possible inside so that it returns the figure to its natural form or close to it, and this malady according to which suits it from the operation and instruments in the greater dispositions.
Chapter .XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men who are solid the eyelid over the eye socket and is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, so far as you enter the extremities of the ray you leave the eyelid, and raise that, or extend that to the unction.
And you cut the adhesion to a thin blade, which is not to the sharpness of the incisions, holding obtuse a little so that this malady is not disturbed from the operation, and remain the blade that does not damage the eye by its sharpness.
And be your incision which releases that adhesion with ease inside so that it is returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that is healed all the adhesion.
And you put in the eye salt water with which you wash; or distill in it of Zuni dissolved in water.
And separate between the eyelid and the eye with two fingers, and place over the eye wool infused in album of wine, and then third day use from causes of consolidation inside that is healed.
Chapter  .XVI.
Of incision of unguent and of eminence of flesh of the lacrimal.
You know that unguent is according to two ways, because it is either nervous, and seems like a hard subtle ciphac; or is not nervous, like white frozen humidity, which when it touches the blade, or must be forced to take a piece, is separated, and the piece does not remain on it.
And both spices do not begin until from the lacrimal major that goes little by little that covers the vision and prohibits light and the movement of eye.
May the way of working in the incision is that this malady pause its head on the floor, and return the eyes to you. And open the eyelids, and raise the eyelid to you, and collect the unguent with two drops, and extend that to the extremities above it. And take an arrow and insert it into that hair of horse or ox or cow, or of the same, or of the fat solid, or double the extremities of the arrow little by little and keep that in the middle of the unguent, and pierce that with the arrow, and bind the unguent to the fat thread; and extend that to the extremities above it, and cut off with the blade a little hair from the edge of the unguent which severs the pupil. And so you follow that with the hair inside behind of it.
And you cut the romance in the roots of the lacrimal with a thin blade or with small scissors, and allow the flesh of the lacrimal natural that does not involve continuous flow of tears by incision of that.
And some times the unguent with salt oil extended or with fat, so far as it has said, and return the blade of lion that this is the form of it:
And you take care that with the blade do not touch the corneal skin and that is involved in its rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
And the incision cuts in the eye a little salt mixed or very well dried, and leaves that inside for another day; and care that this water is not involved inside that is healed.
If the unguent is not nervous and you cannot put the blade, or does not remain in that onci, then take this kind of unguent that is treated with medicines, and heal that way with eye and recommend it in the division.
If you want to cut that, then you open the eyelids of this malady and take a blade of lion sharpened according to this form: in subtlety. If that is rarefied and is constricted and taken in that root, then distil it from your hour in the eye of very well dried or very well dried salt, and close the eye inside for another day.
And repeat the operation on that inside that is refreshed all that it is from him, but the opposite does not stop cauterizing it in the eye, because then you leave that, and heal at first the apostema inside that is healed.
And repeat your operation on that with reason so that is healed.
The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if you notice it in the eye by great damage, should be suspended with unguent; and cut that from that one, and do not complete the incision so that does not involve continuous flow of tears.
And distill in the lacrimal eye very well dried within that is healed.
Chapter  .XVII.
Of incision of algazardenic and of water that is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Some times in the eyelids of eye is born the flesh that is dried up, and it is overlaid inside that covers the pupil, or comes near to join or separates on both sides and is assembled at a rock of pillar.
May the operation in it is that this malady pause its head on the floor; and return the eyelids of that and collect all that flesh with two convenient scissors to water, and hold that water with one forcep or with basket; and cut off the flesh at first so that is finished with incisions, and take care of the eye that does not involve that in your operation.
And be your incision at which you cut those or with a blade that we have said in the incision of unguent, or with small scissors at which is collected as required according to the form of it that is appropriate to this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that flesh is refreshed, then fill the eye with salt dried up or distill in it powder that seems to be of corrosive medicines, and place over the eye below with album of wine so that is secured from the apostema cauterizing it.
If some cause of algardenic is present and is constricted cauterizing it, and fears apostema cauterizing it, then leave the eye and heal that apostema with water so that involves that apostema, and repeat the operation on that within that is healed, and seems according to this form in the flesh adjusted that occurs in the eye of this type.
May, however, you know that you remove all the cure of eye flesh by way natural or by way accidental, with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations within you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
Chapter  .XVIII.
Of collection of knowledge in the eye.
Such as veins that are dried up on the eye and prohibit from the vision of your operation, and distil the eye over a period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you need to consider if the eye in which is dried up is strong and in it is not another malady that is dried up, then collect that knowledge.
And is that you order this malady to pause its head on the floor, and suspend those veins with a drop or two according to your prudence; and be that drop of unguent according to this form:
Then he should take two ounces of this liquid according to this method:
Then carefully gather those small veins together with tweezers and gently remove them hour by hour until the blood stops flowing from the vein; otherwise the blood will pool in the wound and the person may become infected.
And be sure that you do not cut the blood vessels at the ends of the foot; and if your operation is in front of the sun, and hold it firmly during your operation so that you only cut those veins.
Then once you are finished, then you should boil the blood with vinegar or ale so that it becomes thicker and less likely to spread;
But if that is not possible for you to collect all of it in one hour, then you should squeeze the blood as much as possible until it stops flowing; and leave it for several days until the pain has subsided and the wound has healed completely.
Then repeat this process a second time, but only if necessary, until it is cured.
And this is the shape of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
On reduction of hernia to the nose.
When you treat hernias with either cauterization or acute medicine according to the description given above and it does not heal, then do not use surgery on it unless you cut open the swelling and remove all the contents within it, and extract all the fluid, leaving only dry matter;
And if the bone is exposed or blackened due to the infection, then you should use an instrument which has this shape:
It is called a sharp-tipped cap, and it is made of iron, and the tip is rounded like this with a sharp point made by grinding or a sharp edge made by filing (as in the following figure).
Then place it over the infected area of the bone, and carefully rotate it between your fingers, gently pressing your hand towards the center to make sure that the infection is completely removed.
And you should then make a few cuts with a sharp knife, and then apply an astringent or a drying agent to the area.
Then if the wound is well-healed and the skin is good and the blood vessel has been cut off from the wound by means of a bandage or cloth for ten days, and there is no swelling or infection and nothing happens to it, then you know that it is healed.
Otherwise, unless the second bone is exposed or infected by acute medicine, and if it is exposed, then you should use this method:
The upper part of the iron triangle should be placed on the edge of the bone at that end, and the point of the knife should touch the end of the bone, so that there is no space between them;
Then place it over the bone, and keep your hand near the lacrimal; then gently press your hand towards the edge of the bone, and with a slight movement of your hand, feel around to make sure that it does not hurt; and if it hurts when you touch it, then stop and do not use this method.
Then apply astringent medicines to dry the area.
Then if the wound heals well, the matter that was shed at the edges should return to the nose, and then pour the liquid over the wound.
Chapter XX.
On reduction of a swelling on the liver.
When the liver has swollen completely and nothing happens to it, then you should massage it gently, and then if there are no signs of improvement or swelling, then you should use oil which has been made into a paste with ash, salt, and vinegar; and then place this over the liver with a cloth, and cover the area with a warm compress. Then apply a poultice to the liver using a powdery substance.
And for the powder you should take sheets of linen, and each sheet should be folded in four, and these folds should be made into a thick substance.
Then place this powder on the liver over the other layer of cloth, according to how much is needed for the liver. Then bind this tightly with a sturdy cloth, and repeat the process of applying the warm compress; then remove the cloth after an hour, and allow the liver to rest while covering it with a cloth.
But if the liver becomes soft during this time, then be careful; do not use too much pressure when binding it.
Then remove the cloth after an hour, and allow the liver to rest while covering it with a cloth.
If the liver has already been reduced in size, then that is good; otherwise, repeat the process of applying the poultice, stricture, and warm compress until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On incisions into a swelling on the eye socket.
When there is a swelling on the eye socket and it disturbs the skin of the eyelid, and with a sharp knife cut along the edge of the eyelid, and then cut through the inner corner of the eye, cutting through the soft parts of the eye; then carefully remove any of the soft parts that are stuck to the eye; and if there is an obstruction in the eye's pupil, then open it with your finger or a thin blade, and take out the blockage; then cut along the edge of the eyelid again, and fix the lid back into place, holding it firmly.
Then remove the blade or needle, and place it over the eye socket with a little bit of sheep's wool soaked in milk; then leave it for a moment before removing it.
Then care for the patient with warm water to make sure that he is comfortable and his pain is relieved.
On certain parts of the body a circular band of cloth should be placed around the swelling, and it should be pierced with a sharp needle that enters the skin very gently; then the liquid from the swelling should run onto the palm, and the person should wash their hands.
Then bind it securely until it heals.
Chapter XXII.
On treatment for eye problems.
This malady, which is called conjunctivitis, is not a disease of the liver; it is a disease of the eye, resembling running water, and it has no relation to the liver.
The treatment for this disease is to massage the eyelids gently and to apply a cold compress; then keep your hand near the edge of the eye, and if you feel any pain, then stop and do not use this method.
If it does not come down, then know that it is water.
If it is not prepared for the descent of the disease with water, then use a sharp needle to pierce between your fingers and carefully insert it into the eye, looking at the front part of the conjunctiva, where the blood vessel enters; then remove the disease without touching the transparent part of the eye.
Then when it is removed, then you should boil the blood with honey or water that you have already mixed with fennel seeds and honey.
Then carefully inspect the rest of the body for any other causes, until it is cured.
Chapter XXII.
On treatment for blood that comes from the liver.
We have already mentioned the spices of water in the division and how they agree to pierce with sound; then follow this treatment for blood that comes from the liver:
Then you should massage the eyelids gently between two fingers and place a cold compress on the liver; then cover it with a cloth, and leave it for an hour.
And place your right hand near the eyelid of his left eye, if the eye is on the left side; or your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
And place your right hand over his right eye, if the eye is left-sided; or your left hand, if the eye is right-sided.
And place the tip of the finger near the corner of the eye, over the eyelid, along the width of the brow bone from the tear gland, and gently push the eyebrow up with your hand.
And insert the finger into the eye socket and feel that the eye has been reached by the touch of the finger.
And note the distance between the edge of the iris and the end of the dark ring, for this is the height of the pupil at its full opening; and you will see that the pupil's visual field is determined by the clarity of the cornea.
And place the finger into the opening where the water is, and then another servant should hold a mirror up; if the water falls quickly, then the patient' eye is open; but if it does not, then the patient has a closed eye.
And pause for a moment; and if the water falls slowly, then you should hold up the mirror before the eye; and when the finger is taken out, then the patient' eye will be open.
And if it stops falling and does not fall again, then you should take the finger out easily, and gently rotate it towards the patient' face, and dip the tip in clear salt solution from a gem; and then rinse the eye with the solution, and place your hand over the eye; and wait until the water comes out of the eye.
May this not be known except by those who have lived in these times, and may they be written down for future generations.
And if, because of the hardness of your eye, you do not obey the finger placed on your eyelid—for there are some men for whom the eyelid is very hard—then consider the following form of words:
Then pierce it at that point with a fine needle, and do not stop until the finger has passed into the eye socket.
And place the finger in quickly, as I have said.
And you should give the credit for this work to your servant who is staying in a dark house, and not allow any movement at all.
And wait for the nature of the water to be changed so that its taste becomes pleasant, and do not let your hair touch either side at any time.
And may this agreement hold good for three days.
And remove it from that dark house and examine the sight carefully, and then return the finger within the day. vii.
And do not allow anyone to touch the water in the time of cleaning or to dip the finger into it. While you are holding water away from your eyes, because the water will spread freely and quickly over your face due to its great force and intensity.
May this not happen again, unless it is within seven days; and if it does, then examine the eye carefully with water that has been left to settle for a while.
And then you should carefully wash the face with water, and wait for a few days before examining it again in that dark house.
And remove any trace of dirt from the face carefully and converse about the causes.
And know that it is not an excuse for any vision problems; and you should be careful with the procedure.
And some of these have been brought to us by the hand of Artaxerxes, and some say that it is fire in the eye; when the finger is inserted into the eye, water comes out.
However, there is a kind of water in our country that has been perfected and which makes one's eyes clear; and it may well be that this water can heal the blinded eye.
And these are the forms of medicines which should not be taken by those who do not know them:
They should be made from iron or from lead, and these are the extremes of this triangular mixture: the sharp end, such as that which is used for cutting; the soft end, such as that which can be pressed into a mold; and the middle part, such as that which is rolled out like paper.
Chapter XXVII.
Of meat there shall be none in the nose.
When various kinds of meat are hidden in the nose, and there is a cause for it which gathers together scorpions of different sizes, or a wart that resembles one; this disease is called warts, because it does resemble one. And from him comes cancerous meat, a lump, of a fawn-like color; and from him comes meat like that of a lion, not of a fawn-like color.
Then in that meat which is neither fraudulent nor cancerous, place your hand on the sun and then cut the palm; and pierce the tip of the finger with a fine needle in those meats. And remove it from the sides carefully, and cut off with a fine knife that part which has been reached by the needle; and if for any reason the cutting is not enough, then you should take a small, sharp instrument, such as an awl, and pierce it through to the other side. May this not happen again unless it is due to an accident; and if it is a malicious apoplexy, then examine carefully to find the cause and cut off all the parts affected by it; and let the holes be covered so that no wound is left behind.
And place the finger in the nose carefully, and then wash it with water or with vinegar. May this not be a cold nose; and if you notice moisture in the palate, then you will know that it is already healed.
May this not be the case; then you will know that there is nothing inside it except flesh and bones; for no cutting has been done to those parts of the nose.
Then wait until the finger has been inserted into the nose completely; and then feel carefully for the third time between each of the nostrils, and note the quantity of the touch; and place your hand on the nostril that needs attention and then pierce it with a fine needle to the side; and if this does not help, then examine carefully and cut off what is needed.
And when the water has been left to settle, so that it reaches the nostrils, and if its odor is pleasant to the taste buds; then it should touch your palate, for many children suffer from this problem in school; and it may be a cause of this, which you can try to find out by doing.
And place the two extremities of the finger at opposite ends, one projecting outside the nose and the other inside; and then hold it together carefully, and if it is not enough, then place a small needle on the tip; and pierce it into the nose to the side where you need it, for you will know that the flesh has already been reached by the needle.
And remove the finger from the nose carefully; and place it on the nose for the third time, or more, until the cutting is done completely; and if this does not help, then examine carefully and cut off what needs to be cut off.
And remove the finger from the nose carefully; and place it in the ear for a short time, so that it is cured completely.
May this not be an excuse; then use the above remedy.
And here is the form of the medicine that purifies and makes clear the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.
And if you want, make a closed tube from cane, and the tube of the instrument with a flat, exposed tip; handle it by its end, which holds the liquid or water that you want to drain from the pus and from the causes that cause them.
Chapter .25.
And cut off their tips at the ends of the nose.
If there are any bumps on the tips of the nose, they should be cut off and the area cleaned and monitored for several days to determine if there is any inflammation.
And by water that you pour on it in the beginning of its appearance, and leave all of it. Then place a hot cauterization or burning medicine on the spot where it is located.
If it is delayed for a long time before it is magnified, consider whether it is hard, of dark color and little feeling, then do not touch that with a sharp iron, because if there are any bumps on the tip of the nose, consider that it is due to a great evil in that area of the nose.
And if the pustule is a soft touch and not of dark color, and when it is possible to cut all of it, then empty the patient' and cut out that part with fear, and cure the area with water that washes and soothes it until it heals.
Chapter .26.
Of surgery on the nose, lips, and ear when the continuity is broken by plague or similar.
Know that when surgery to repair continuity occurs in one of these cartilage pieces, it is only done on a few people.
So then, when there is any cause of those, consider whether it is a fresh plague and if so, give it the sanctum, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with surgery, and then cure that within until it heals.
And if the lips of the solution for continuity are already separated, and each is healed separately, then consider whether there is any break in their cord, and within that, give it a sanction. Then adjust the two lips with surgery and strengthen them, and spray on them the sanctum of dragon and salt water, and put a thin layer of plaster on them, or some other type of hardening plaster, and leave it alone for two or three days, then remove it and replace the plaster, and let it dry out within until it heals.
The method of surgery is that you add the solution for continuity or with needles as described in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with thread as described above.
Chapter .27.
Of extracting those causes that come between the two lips inside.
If there are any bumps inside the two lips of some people, they resemble hard lumps to the color of fat, and some of them are small and some are large.
Then consider whether you can convert those two lips and close each of those硬块 entirely, and within that, dip the place with a strong salt water, then wash it with soap, and cure the area with water that is slightly bitter, until it heals.
Chapter 28.
Of cutting into the flesh that is fitted to the gums.
The small white bumps on the gum flesh that is fitted are due to a soft thing, so consider whether you have it with a sharp knife or have it cut off with scissors and remove those that have it, then let the blood flow or give it the sanctum.
Then place a dry salt water or another type of stinging powder on the spot.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it off again in a second operation, because the cauterization will not return.
Chapter .29.
Of reasons for teeth to be sharp.
When on the surface of teeth in the middle and between the gums are fitted smooth edges, sharp corners, and some are dark red and become yellow or green within until the gum bleeds when water runs through it, and some teeth are sharp.
And so then, if you do not see the patient's back between their teeth and stop the edge of the tooth with your hand, and rub the teeth where those sharp edges appear, resembling sand within until it does not cause any pain, and if there is a dark color or yellow or green, then that is due to the gum running water.
Then if it is later water that is found in those at the beginning of the reason, then do not repeat the reason; otherwise, you should repeat the reason on those at another day and again on the third day until you find a final answer in that which you want to know.
Know that teeth require different types of tools and shapes depending on how they are prepared for your operation. And for this reason, the edge of the tooth that is cut from the middle inside is different from the edge of the tooth that is cut between the teeth depending on other shapes; and these shapes of razors are always prepared which you will soon see:
Chapter 30.
Of root extraction from teeth.
Then consider whether you can cure the pain of the tooth entirely and with patience, as there is no reason to delay the extraction of the tooth when it is due for extraction, because the substance is sublime within until it causes an excuse in the extraction of the tooth.
Then consider whether you can extract that tooth forcibly and firmly, and if it is painful for the patient to extract that tooth, as has been shown by experience that pain stops when the tooth is completely extracted, because there is no reason to delay extracting a tooth that needs to be extracted.
Then consider whether you can be certain which is the painful tooth, and if you know that for sure, then consider whether you can cut into the path of the tooth with a sharp knife in the place where there is no value, until it is completely dissolved from the gum at the beginning, and then cut off that tooth slowly bit by bit, until it breaks off.
Then place a strong and sharp force between the teeth that you have to extract it without breaking it, and then extract that tooth slowly, until it breaks off; do not hit it hard or with your hands, as this may cause pain, but use a gentle and slow extraction method.
And if it is not a loose tooth, then take one of those instruments, and put that under the tooth completely with ease, and try to remove it slowly as you would at the beginning.
If the tooth is loose or worn away, then consider whether you can fit a string around that tooth and tighten it at the end of the string completely without stretching it at the time of your extraction; do not use any sharp things to cut into that tooth as this may cause pain.
And when you make a precise incision around the entire gum, be careful to maintain your strength so that you do not break the opening of it and return over the patient for the harm that is less than the first pain of it.
And be careful that you do not spill water which the ignorant barbers in their final stage and audacity about the eradication of them, for they do not administer such water to us; because with a single stroke of a razor, great harm comes to men, and the roots of their teeth are all pulled out, or some of them, or that you extract that bone from the jaw with a single stroke of a razor, as the water-spilling witnesses.
And the eradication of it be washed with a cold or hot salt water.
And if there is a flow of blood from it, as well as with a single stroke of a razor, take a certain amount of salt and spray it on the wound, and if it does not stop that blood, then cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and tweezers is very important for the tooth to be removed at the beginning, with a long handle, a short grip, and thick tips, so that they are not bent when you have to operate with them.
And sometimes with wide handles so that when you first use them they are not bent, but with short tips.
And they are made of iron from India, with very short tips, and at the end of them are teeth that some are shorter than others and tighten strongly, and some of those tips have the shape of a bird's beak, which is sharp, and they are of strong contraction.
Chapter .31.
Of the eradication of teeth and the breaking of bones from the mandibles that are broken.
When you have to extract a tooth that is broken in two, then know that you pause on the spot for a day or two until it softens; and if you insert tweezers or needles at the end of them, which are assembled like the beak of a bird, called ciconia or guant
And at the end of them are made with a file or alfinete.
And if you do not obey your doctor with these tweezers or needles, then know that you cut off the root and extract the instrument which has the name of an awl, so it is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
And have a very thick tip and not be embedded so that it does not break.
Therefore, if the root is poked out, it is good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, whose shapes are as follows: The first instrument has a triangular shape at the end, with some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have two thin tips.
And you are helped with these instruments, having two ramps whose shape is as follows: the ramp of the lever has the following shape: And with other instruments which will precede in the shaving of teeth; for this instrument is easily made with an awl, and it is as follows:
of the triangular shape with a curved or short tip, which has some thickness, and not be embedded so that it does not break.
And you should know that the dental instruments are similar to other instruments.
May the crafters be wise and subtle in their art, invent new methods for themselves according to what they have learned from others; because there are different types of harm that the little ones did not know or stop using their instruments due to the shapes of various species.
May the doctor carefully examine the broken bone in its place according to what is most appropriate for the patient from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of teeth roots, and help yourself with gestures whose shape is as follows:
And be in some small thickness to small thickness, and be tightened or tied up to the mouth so that it does not run away or escape until the bone is completely poked out; and then restore the place with convenient medicines for him.
May if there is a small hole in the bone, then break that bone from that hole and from its blackness; and heal it within so that it is healed.
Chapter.32.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth compared to other teeth.
When prominent teeth are not in line with the natural course of their peers, and this is more the case with female teeth, and even more so with elderly women's teeth; then know that if a tooth is not next to another tooth, and it cannot be extracted by sawing or piercing it, then cut it off; but if it is not attached to any other tooth, then use the following instrument whose shape is as follows: it resembles a pig's ear, and it is made of iron with a very sharp tip.
And be your incision which you make with the following instrument in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not connected to any other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is extended by sawing, then saw it with a file of iron from India whose shape is as follows:
And all of it is made of iron from India and the point is very sharp; and let it be made with a file whose shape resembles needles, and with which the tooth is gradually shaved in two days' time with ease, so that it is not connected to any other teeth by cutting it off. And then cut that line with a sharp knife, and break that tooth with very small razors.
And if it is a tooth that one side is broken and the other side is whole, then know that you saw off that part of it which is open and curved, and make it flat so that the tongue does not lick it or the word is corrupted.
Chapter.33.
Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver fillings.
When there is a blow or impact on the teeth, and the patient cannot stop bleeding, and you have treated it with stinging medicines, and it has not worked, then know that gold fillings do not break as easily as silver fillings; because silver fills do not break for a long time, but gold fillings break soon after they are put in; however, gold does not corrode over time.
And be the filling in such a subtlety and thickness according to how much it can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take the filling and put double its size between two healthy teeth, and then if it breaks into two parts, it will reach half the size of the two filled teeth, or if there is one tooth filled, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the process to the other half of the tooth, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it does not break.
And be your structure with which you strengthen the filling so that the roots of the teeth do not run away.
And then cut off the excess filling with tweezers or pincers, and add what is necessary to the place, and convert those that are visible into small holes between the healthy tooth and the filled tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue. And then leave that one stretched with a string.
May if it is broken or damaged, strengthen it with another filling at the right time.
And this is the form of teeth and figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two bad ones, so such as these:
And when one tooth is to be returned, or two, put them in their places again as they have been broken, and let them stay there.
But he does not make this except a good artisan and a wise man.
And some are apt for a certain cause of cows' bones; and is done to them so as the form of teeth, and is placed in the place where the tooth fails, and is strengthened so as we have said, and remain and serve them up for long time.
Chapter.XXXIV.
Of the incision of the ligament which is seen in the tongue, and forbids talking.
This ligament which is seen leaving the tongue some are natural to a man, or by chance and happens because of a plague which has already been consolidated.
And the operation on it is that one opens the patient's mouth, his skull existing in the middle of the jaw; and raises his tongue, and cuts this nervous ligament according to its depth so as not to tear the tongue from its recency.
But if in that there is any hardness or denudation, and it stands because of the consolidation of the plague, then you cut one once and cut this according to its depth so as not to tear the ligament and be dissolved the nodulation.
And keep that there is no fracture made in the preon of the flesh, so as to cut here iron and bring out flux from the vein.
And be washed the trace of the incision with clean water or with salt water or with a rubbing of water; and place away the tongue in a way that it not consolidated another time.
But if there is a flow of blood, place over the site vitriol three times; but if the blood flows, then cauterize the site with a caustic which is given to water. And take care that it be cured with other causes before it is healed.
Chapter.XXXV.
Of the extraction of a whelk from the tongue.
Some happen naturally that leaves the tongue swollen like a small dumpling, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and is strong enough that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that one opens the patient' s mouth between his teeth and looks at the swelling.
And if you see a dark or black color in it, and is hard, and the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch it, for it is rough.
And if it is white, in which there is moisture, then you put the oil on it, and cut this with a fine scalpel, and cut all off; and if blood flows at the time of your operation, then you pause with three clean finger tips, so as it is vitriol, within that it stop the blood.
And return to your work within that you have treated it with respect, within that it is washed with salt water and vinegar; and take care that it be cured with another cure before it is healed.
Chapter.XXXVI.
Of the extraction of an abscess of two ears, and of that which is nothing in the hole, and of other abscesses.
When the abscess is close to a gland, and it is swollen like an apple, which has happened suddenly, and are called two ears, which when you treat them with water that we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then examine whether the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and does not feel pain; then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for fear of the blood flowing; but leave that until it has matured, and then either pull it out, or cut it off yourself.
And if it is white in color, soft, and the root is thin, then that should be cut out.
And the operation on it is that you examine, before your operation, whether it has remained stationary or has decreased by any diminution; and then put the patient between his teeth, facing towards the sun, and opens his mouth, and place servants before him, holding the patient' s tongue away with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
It should be made of silver or of brass, and should be thin with a sharp edge.
Then place your fingers on that, and show it to you the abscess, and put oil on that, and let it rest in the crease, and pull it apart outward as much as you can. Another water which takes away any cause of the tunics, and then cut that with an instrument of which this is the form:
Another water which takes away any cause of the tunics, and then cut that with an instrument of which this is the form: And is joined with tweezers, however its ends are sharp, so that the hole of each of them is in the end of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron tempered.
But if this instrument is not at hand to you, then cut it with a scalpel of which this is the form: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And then when you have cut one notch, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then cut the tongue of the patient with a sharp knife.
But if there is a flow of blood, wash that with water boiled with sage or with a leaf of mint; and take care that the blood be stopped before it is healed.
And some happen naturally in the hole, other abscesses besides these two ears, and cut them according to this method of cutting two notches, making one notch sharp and the other not sharp.
And I have already cured a woman of an abscess which was born in her hole, which abscess was red in color, and did not feel pain, and this woman had closed the hole in her hole, and she breathed normally, and had forbidden herself to eat or drink water, and would have died if it had not been treated.
The abscess was already so great that it had filled two pockets within her.
Then I hid my face in a fold of cloth, and put my finger in one of his eyes, and threw it away from me, and took a great amount of blood, and then cut that eye out, and pulled the tongue out of the hole, and I held my finger in the mouth of the patient.
And I removed a large part of his tongue, and did not feel pain from it. Then absolutely stopped her from drinking water, and soon I began to give her a drink, so that I did not cut that abscess into pieces for a long time, and the abscess came out in place of that one, which cut within that.
Then I gave her a drink and cauterized her mouth, then went around and did not know that God had saved me from that patient.
Chapter.XXXVII.
Of the incision of a hula when it is swollen.
When the hoola is swollen with catarrh, and it is long, then let it be called a lump; but if it becomes thick and round, then let it be called a bubbl.
But when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and you do not feel your cure, and there is no more fever after it has stopped, and it is red in color or black, and does not feel like a hundred degrees to you, then let it be cut out which is aggregated round; but if it is long, and bleeds, of dark or black color, and feels like a hundred degrees to you, then let it be cut out with an instrument.
And when you see the second manner that I have described of his whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue to the instrument with which he will mold his form and fit the nails in the new, and pull those down and carve them with one of two instruments that you call in the incision of two melas.
And where it is not suitable to carve that which is placed on the natural term of its addition, because if you carve too much of him, you will prevent his speaking.
And he shall make the incision, use what I have recommended in the incision of two melas, and he will heal him within so that it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision of him, where he uses engineering in the cauterization of him, his cauterizing manner in him is only with sharp water, and it is because you pause the head of the patient on his thigh, and press his tongue to the instrument which we have said, and from the water which we have described in the cauterization chapter, fill that one alive, and pause that not thick or thin, and from that fill the cavity of the instrument with which this is the shape:
Be the extremity of him who is paused medicine in his cavity like the cavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument on his uvula, and the patient will bite on his tongue so that saliva or mucus comes out of his mouth by the medicine inside, so that he does not send it down from there for any cause over his throat and so that he does not choke.
And bring your hand close to the medicine, and squeeze that one over the uvula for a space of half an hour within which he will be blackened and softened by the biting of the medicine.
And if you want, take hold and wrap that one around the extremity of him, and dip the hold in the medicine, and put that one into a tube from above so that the hold adheres to that tube, and make it so often as you wish to cauterize the uvula, and let that one be because it will dry up and fall after three or four days.
And if you wish to repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and let the cauterization be washed in the circuit of the uvula with the hold embedded in it, and rub him with that water which is in the circuit of him from the medicine, and let him be bathed with soap, and inside let him be cured with salves, and within so that he is healed.
And this kind of cure is more safe than incision and longer from fear.
Some are cured with water which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is healed with sub fumigation in this way: take the following herbs, calament, ysop, origano, ruda, scicados arabic, camomile, bread and similar to those of the plants, and adjust all of them or some of them in a vessel, and let them be submerged with vinegar, and boil; and let the vessel be well stirred with a ladle, and put in its place a sharp instrument of iron according to this manner; it shall be made of silver or iron.
And put the end in the patient's mouth so that the steam comes to the uvula on the quantulum, so that the uvula is covered with smoke.
And repeat on those spots that are dry, and keep in mind that you do not make this cure at the coming of the aphorisms, because it would fit too much into the aphorism, and do not make water, but rather the declaration of the aphorism of him cauterization.
But if you do not have this instrument with you, then take a cane and put in its extremity a lid of wood, so that the patient’s mouth is closed, because the lid of the wood stops the steam from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On Extracts from Thorns and Water that Sticks in the Throat and Other Causes.
Spots sticking in the throat or any other cause.
And then extract water that appears from it, on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue to the instrument in front of the sun, so that your water is declared in the throat.
And water that does not appear to your sight in the throat, where you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because it fortifies the cause of the throat by vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of nap, or a piece of raisin from lettuce, or a piece of bread dry; or take a dry sponge of marine leon and wet that strongly with water, and put it to the patient’s mouth, because when it reaches the place where thorns are stuck, then it is thrown out, because when you extract it, it is as if you had thrown yourself away. And then take a snake and grip it by the tail, and extract it; or take a pig and grip it by its tail, and extract it; or take an ass and grip it by the tail, and extract it.
But if you do not throw those causes away that I have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And be thicker than a spoon is small, and in the extremity of him make the cavity which you enter into his throat with ease.
And hold his head up, and keep in mind that the touch of his jaw with the throat, so that it does not hurt him, because he bites or spits it out, or because it hurts him.
But the patient who inserts himself is better, because of his knowledge of the place of the cause annexed and he sticks in the place, and pulls his hand to the instrument on him, all according to the quantity that is prepared for him so that it does not hurt.
Chapter LIX.
On Extracting Blood from a Throat Ancillary.
When blood is extracted with water that I have described in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confess, then consider in the patient's throat to the sun, because you have moved the patient's tongue to the instrument which I have told you.
Then if you see blood, extract it with a small handful or a subtle gesture gently.
And if you cannot extract it with that, then take a concave tube and put it in the patient' throat, and hold a hot iron in the cavity of the tube, and make as many times as the blood is dead and has stopped in the throat (and no more) and abstain from drinking water for all the day.
And then take a bowl full of rubbing water, and work the patient' mouth in it, and wash his mouth with it; and do not eat anything from that blood and drink water after an hour or two with his hand, because the blood will taste soon.
But if the blood is not thrown out with water that I have described, then sub fumigate the patient with cimert or assafetida by the instrument which I have described in the sub fumigation of the uvula.
Make water, and so in both ways.
And it is another way of operating in sub fumigation of that water, is that you take a vessel in which are carbo ignites and the vessel is covered with a cloth, and there is a hole in the middle of the cloth, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then remove the sub fumigation from it; and hold the patient’s mouth to the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the sub fumigation does not escape until you know that the sub fumigation is coming to the blood, because the blood soon comes.
And if the cat does not drink, then you repeat the subhumid motion of the animals, abstain from drinking, eat salty foods and other things, and do not drink water, for this regime is necessary to be forgotten.
This is the form of the instrument to extract blood from the vein when it is seen; and it is similar to tweezers, so sometimes, but because it has some curve. Then place the instrument on the vein, and its end is similar to an owl's beak, which is sharp, in which a piece of limestone is inserted, so that when you press it, it doesn't let go.
Chapter.XL.
In which is the sum of the speech in preparation for emesis and in section of them.
The emetic pills are special grains, prepared in various ways, according to which one remembers them from this book.
And there are several ways to pierce and cut them, of which one is for the species of emetics in themselves; and by means of humidity.
And the second way is proper places where this happens to the body, because the emetic accident in the head is different from the emetic accident in the buttocks; and the emetic accident in the flesh is different from the emetic accident at the joint; and each of them has a treatment by means of operation.
More emetic pills are some that do not require piercing, but proper drying up of the medicine in them or completion of their preparation.
Other emetic pills are some that, when crossed, require not being dried up but proper completion of their preparation, so that they do not prolong the effect within which they can be made to act; and firm corruption of the ligaments or nerves of that joint happens, so that it causes pain in that member; or it is an emetic near a principal member, and if you delay the piercing of it, it does not mature into a sore in the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, then pierce it not fully mature, and do not wait for its complete digestion, but pierce it when it is prop to the buttocks, so that it does not prolong the effect within which it can act; and firm corruption of the ligaments or nerves of that joint happens, so that it causes pain in that member; or it is an emetic near a principal member, and if you delay the piercing of it, it does not mature into a sore in the principal member; or it is prop to the buttocks, then pierce it when it is not fully digested, and do not wait for its complete digestion. More cover that you know the time of piercing the emetic pill, and then it is when it is mature.
And you know that it is mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and a decrease in strength and pulse; and the acuteness of the head of the emetic pill, and the other signs.
And because you know that piercing will cause pain in the place above the emetic pill and from the cure of the eminence.
And the piercing should be done at a long distance from the flesh or the body, if the emetics are near the joints of the main members or feet, and in places of the skin, nerves, and armpits; and finally, in any place that is not reflected; because in those that are reflected, use the piercing according to that member.
More when the emetic is in a flesh place, then do not pierce it until its digestion is complete according to its preparation; because if you pierce it before that time, it prolongs the effect of the medicine within which it can act; and firm pressure happens on the lips of it, so they become hard and deep.
More emetic pills are to be pierced according to the depth of flesh or body necessity, or according to which member digests it.
And when you administer small piercing, and in the emetic pills large large piercing and wide or several sections according to the variety of their size.
And the emetic pills are some in which you know that the rope is tied and cut when it has been long enough to mature; or those that happen in two or three days.
And of those that are not cut in section have three angles; and of those that are marked with a figure of an oak leaf, or with emetic pills of the joints.
And of them are administered circular section and lunar section, resembling those.
More when the head is affected, and its emetic pills are superficial lions, you pierce them with a shallow piercing, or only a flat one.
And when the emetic is thick and has collected some medicine, pierce it, and do not wait to extract all of it at that time; take a small piece out, and on another day, extract a larger piece, and gradually extract it according to its graduality within which it can be acted.
And if the patient is of virile virtue, or a female, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude, because the animal spirit has a strong desire for the exit of the medicine, and firm pressure stops it; and you open them up.
Keep this chapter carefully guarded, and return to your piercing of these emetic pills, being careful not to cause illness; because if the emetic is small, or a flat section, then you administer a little juice of mint or mint water; and if the emetic is large, and the piercings are thin, then you pause with a needle within which both come together.
And if in the emetic is cut off a piece of the rope or is crushed, then you make it up with a strong old person or a thin thread of linen, and then, when you have washed it, strengthen that within three days; and proceed to that and cure the water that covers it within which it can be acted upon.
More if a flow of blood happens at the time of your operation, then you administer hot water and vinegar in which to soak a piece of linen cloth, and place it over the area of the flow of blood.
More if the flow of blood persists, then you administer the regiment and treatment and powders that I have recommended in various places of this book and division.
More if it is in winter time, and the area of the emetic is an area of many nerves, then you place powder of wine or oil between them; and pause that powder on the areas.
And if it is in summer time and the areas are flesh areas, then you place powder of wine or oil or wine and oil into them; and all this should be done within three days, as I have said; and then, when you have removed the emetic, wash it with water and vinegar, or wine and water, or both mixed together, until it is clean.
And this is the water that is necessary to know about the cure of emetics universally, more specifically according to the way of distinction; I have already said that every emetic has a specific way of being cured by individual chapters.
Chapter.XL.
Of the section of emetics that come in the rope of the head.
In the rope of the head small emetic pills are, and they contain various kinds of seeds; and their species are:
And there are some that are pips, and those that contain humidity similar to lemon juice. And those that contain moisture resembling perspiration and resembling them; and those that are hard, dry.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you should the extraction of those does not cause discomfort arceria.
And the operation in section of those is that you spray those with an instrument the form of which it brings to this way, which is called entremeses, within that you know that contains.
If that water that contains moisture, then you cut it by section according to the length for superficial section according to this form:
And you start in the section of the line of .B. within to the line of .G. Then with the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that for which contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, since two examined returns, if remains of that any cause.
And you immerse that in Egyptian oil, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and you fill that with the water and leaves that within another day, since with the water it corrodes all that is removed of that film.
And you repeat that immersion in Egyptian oil second and third time if you need it, within that you trust that there was not any cause of that film; then cure the wound with oil so that it is healed.
And if pus contains something greasy, then you cut that according to this form: in section have form of a crust, and you get up claws between two lips of the section and scrape that from all sides, and exercise your virtue in extraction of the skin which contains that.
Perhaps if your hand causes discomfort, then you make water that you give it to me first.
And apparently you do in the pus of the section and in the cure according to what you have said; and you cut on the pus of the crust is light, since it is of little blood and of little moisture.
And some times so of these pustules that are on the head in some men in which there is not any moisture at all; which cause is since I cut on one pustule on the head of a young woman and made it come out with a loud noise, sharp, white, which could not be opened, and if to anyone it touched, would make them ill.
Perhaps in the other pustules accident on the head this is not this chapter, since the pustules that came to the heads of children and the roots of their ears, but the section of all these be a superficial section.
And you pause the piercing of those from the bottom part of them so that it is relieved the body of the patient to the bottom parts.
Then do you cure those with water that suits to that of the cure.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the section of scrofulas that happen in the neck.
Might appear these pustules in the neck and on the shoulder and in other parts of the body; and some times they appear in all parts.
And those that happen in the neck, and those that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is thin its own skin, and so as to the nodules and pustules on the head, and we have mentioned.
The spices of these scrofula are pus, since some of them are hard, and those that contain moisture, and those that are bad, which do not respond to the cure.
So in that which you respond of good disposition in the Treatment, of which the color of water is evident is propda to the color of the grape, and is pleasant from all sides, and does not join to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor causes discomfort, and is not swollen, then do you cut that with a superficial section from the bottom part of it to the top part of the body in the line of 3.G., within the line of  .B., and scrape that from all sides, and extract two claws, or more if necessary, just as we have said in the pustules on the head, and take out a little at a time.
And it is more careful not to be cut into a vein or nerve.
And be careful not to cut your hand by accident in the section or that does not agree with you in the incision, or that calms the patient, and do not make water that is not necessary to cut; since if you cut a vein or an artery and prevent you from your operation, then you pause in the wound with bitter trissate or other powders that stop the flow of blood, and start again the wound, and let it be softened the wound and begin to rot. When the blood is stopped.
Then return to your operation in which you have completed it.
And then do you ask the old saying if there is any cause of those other small scrofula, then cut those and clean those.
And if it is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, then you do not cut that scrofula from its root. Before you lay that down on a soft cloth and let it rest there for itself falls off without damage.
Then fill the wound with young oil that you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, and then cure it.
And if you cut that scrofula whole, then you adjust the two lips of the wound and clean it as much pus as possible without causing discomfort.
Perhaps if you think there is excess moisture in the wound because of the size of the scrofula, then you understand to cut the root of that, and remove it, and administer a suture and water that is said.
And those scrofula that contain moisture, you make that with superficial piercing here where it appears to you the place of maturation of the patient's body, and you pause the piercing of those that have pus at the bottom part of the body, as we have said.
Then you administer the piercing, either with oil or water, and similar to those, so that it corrods that which is rotted. Then when you see the wound has been cleaned, then do you cure it with oil of generation within that is healed.
Chapter LXXIII.
Of the section of the pilon in the pustule accident on the forehead.
They said that this section is good in the epileptic, and I did not see anyone in our country who had that done.
This is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Perhaps in men there is a tendency, and it is necessary to remove the epileptic with water, since all veins and major nerves are here.
Perhaps in those who have pustules on the mouth or on the ears, and when the epilepsy is not in the canes, then you avoid the section of the epileptic to avoid the loss that is caused by piercing.
Then when you want to cut water, do so with three circles of the epileptic, or four to a small section for width in that place that is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in the middle, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for section, since it is deprived of meat, and the vessels of blood of the patient are there.
And if the medicine is little, then you extend the edge of the forehead with a claw of two claws, and you cut that within reaching the canal, and avoid the vessels of blood if there is any cause of them.
And then cut them according to what we have described; and it is signified over the section of the channel through the flame, which is that by which it is broken up and from the absence of the voice.
Then leave the wound open for some time.
So that when the hour is right, in which piercing is desired, add two strips of ribbon to the wound, and cut off one alone from the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that promote the growth of new meat so that it may be healed.
And Albucasis says that the top of the incision we have described, exposure is nothing but that you see that some of these apopsies have already come out of the patient's belly, and the patient has died, and his intestines have become entangled, and some will go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by some breathing, and be saved from death.
And because of this I order that the wound remain open until the evil of the evil is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; and then I will order the wound to be treated, and heal it.
And so that I may see for myself, one servant took a knife and cut it into the patient' belly and cut off a piece of the cane of the lung, and I was called to the treatment of it, and I stopped the murmuring thus as it was the murmur of the wounded, and uncovered the wound and discovered the bone that was broken from the wound.
Then you confessed that it had not cut a vein nor made an incision, and the wind came out of the wound, and I healed it so that it was healed.
And did not happen to the servant but he suffered in his throat, and after some days he returned to the improvement of his conditions.
And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no danger.
Chapter 34.xliiv.
Of the section on apopsis that happens in front of the throat, and it is called a hernia from the throat.
This apopsis, named a hernia from the throat, is great according to the color of the body, and it happens in women.
And it has two ways, whether it is natural or whether it is accidental.
And in the natural there is no cure.
And the accidental has two ways, one is similar to nodules that are fat, and the other is similar to an apopsis that is caused by a knot in an artery, and there is danger in it. And I do not cover that you make a presumption of him as if he were guilty, but in the one that is small. And you look at it and investigate it with care, and if you see it as nodules that are fat, and it is not suspended to any of the veins, then you cut those nodes and extract them with a knife that can cut the skin and the fur, and otherwise, then examine all of his being, and heal the place with a medicine that heals until it is healed.
Chapter 35.xliv.
Of the section on the nodules.
The nodules are different types, and I have already said all about their divisions in the chapter before this one.
And I cover that you make a difference between a knot and an exit with care.
Then you say that in the exit it is quality and fever and violent pains until the boiling of the superfluity is calmed; and it is complete putrefaction so that at that time the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
But in a nodule there is no quality or fever or pain, and it counts that it may cut the lion that is inside of him.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a knot, and it is made thus with a vacuum, and is greater or smaller, and are according to two types, whether they are fats and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are different, as I have said in the division.
Then when you come to the treatment of a nodule, examine it with care using the instrument that is called an introducer, according to which its shape will be shown in the chapter that follows this one.
And this is the way of examining apopsis and all nodules, that you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you suspect something, and then turn the threads with care little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the ribbon.
Then finish your treatment according to the measure of the size of the apopsis, and then extract the introducer and consider that it is broken from its thread.
And if the moisture runs out, of whatever color it is, then you cut it on a superficial section, as I have said in other apopeses.
And if there is no moisture from the thread's trace, then you know that it is fat.
And dry on it in a superficial section according to this form: as I have taught you, and suspend it with nails, and remove the ribbon from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack, if you can, on that nodule; and extract the sinew with care to the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sinew, and there are different types of skin; then you extract them with care so that they do not break, and I will leave the rest to your discretion.
But if it breaks any cause, little or much, the nodule returns according to its nature.
And if you think that any small part of it breaks, then completely open the wound with some sharp and corrosive powder, and press it on that place where the apopsis is seated; and heal it with another treatment until it is healed.
And if it is a large nodule, then you cut the two sides of it, and heal it with a medicine that enters.
But if the pulsating vein is opposite, or not pulsating, then you cut and stop the bleeding at that place, and leave it open for two or three days until the wound heals, and then return to cutting it again where it is attached to the nodule; and I will leave it to your discretion.
Chapter 36.xliv.
Of the shapes of necessary instruments in section and piercing.
The shapes are three types, one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
The shape of the large introducer is thus:
The shape of the small introducer is thus:
If it is made of iron, of lead, of sharp edges, and carefully turned at the ends, so that the instrument enters into apopeses easily.
And these are the shapes of experience, and they are not called anything else, but one of them is called a needle.
The three types are whether it is large, medium, or small.
The shape of the large experiment, form of it:
The shape of the medium experiment, form of it:
The shape of the small experiment, form of it:
It is agreed that they are used in apopeses and exits and fistulas and buboes, that some of them are from bones, and others from other causes.
And they are made round, flat, and pointed, as with large needles, which are sewn with silk, and are made of lemon oil, or of iron, or of silver, and the rest are made of oil.
And the experience of black feathers, which agree that through them the fistulas in the cavities are opened, which are reflected with their weight to those reflections.
And of the three species, because some of them are long, and others of the other sizes, and others small, according to the amount of the width of the fistula and the strictness of it.
Shape of the great experience of lead:
Shape of the medium experience of lead:
Shape of the small experience of lead:
The shapes of the fingers are of different species, because some are simple, in which there is only one bend, and they are of three species: great, few, and small.
And of them are nails with a hook, and they are of three species.
And of those are nails with two bends, and they are of three species.
And of them are nails with three bends, and they are of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a small simple nail, shape:
Shape of a large nail with two bends: Shape of a medium nail with two bends: Shape of a small nail with two bends:
Shape of a large nail with three bends:
Shape of a medium nail with three bends:
And these are the shapes of the scalpel with which nodules and abscesses are cut and scooped out, and they are of three species, because some are large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of a medium scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but so that it is easily done in the excorciation of the nodes, from the fear of incising a vein or a nerve, and by them being healed, a little at a time, with the application of the cautery, which, through its application, heals the patient and brings about tranquility.
And these are the shapes of the almug, and they are of three species: great, medium, and small, so that you may see them.
When it is made of wax and appears similar to fire, and it is made with alcohol.
And it is on the inside of the foot with the pointed stiletto and in those parts that are hidden from view and at the sides and ends, when you wish, so that it may be seen.
The shapes of the spatulas, which are made between the toes and the piercing of abscesses do not perceive the malady, and they are of three species: great, medium, and small. And these are the shapes of those:
The shapes of the wind chimes with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are of three species; great, medium, and small, the shape:
When it is made of lemon wax, round in shape and not too long, and delicate.
And these species of wind chimes, great, medium and small, that you may stop the flow of blood with speed when necessary, and when you first begin, it is not medicine.
However, do not use these to stop the blood from flowing throughout the body, but only in fleshy places, such as those of the legs and thighs, and on the breasts, belly, and arms, and resembling their flesh.
And some are made of those instruments of others small resembling scissors of scissors according to this form; for which the blood is stopped when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And some are made round according to this form:
Chapter VII.
Of the treatment of male breasts, which are assembled from women.
Some are inflated breasts of old men, like the skin when it is peeling off, and some are inflated breasts, and those of women, and Roman apostemas, bald, shrunken.
And if you wish to cut those with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then cut off all the ugliness, and then apply the remedy of incurable plague, and then join the two lips together with sutures, and heal it within.
May it decline to the sides and be softened by its magnitude, so that it is cut into two pieces with the side parts joined together, resembling a lunar shape, in which each one is contained within the other, from line B to line G, and then cut off all ugliness, and then join the two lips together with sutures, and heal it within.
And if you do not like the incision of that which is cut off, out of fear of the patient's condition, and of the flow of blood, then, if you wish, apply the remedy of incurable plague submerged in corrosive water, and let it rest within that which is cut off, so that it corrode, and heal it within.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the piercing of abscesses that come from below.
Those abscesses that come from below are of the species of scrofulae and nodules, which contain a puss.
And of those some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are cut into a lunar shape according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the fluid is drained out of the abscess of the sore, then you may fill it with cotton and let it rest for another day.
And let the cotton remain in place and be healed with convenient water.
And if the abscess of the species of nodules and scrofulae is, then you may cut them into two parts, as it has been said in the section about scrofulae in pieces.
When the plague extends to the side that is swollen, then apply the cautery according to what has been said in front of it.
Chapter LIX.
Of the piercing of abscesses that occurs through an artery or a vein.
When an artery is broken, and the cord is hardened, which is located above it, then small dots of abscesses form, which cause inflammation and abscesses through the artery or vein: since when an abscess occurs through an artery, it is a long stringy mass in the center of the body; and when you hear the click of an abscess with tiny teeth, you feel a strangeness.
And that which is through a vein is round at its manifestation throughout the body.
And the section above this abscess is an error, and more so in those that are on the sides, and in the arms, and in the neck, and in the locations of the body; and it is large, therefore it is avoided that its cure with iron is skipped, and that which is at the ends or the top, is avoided.
Maze of the patient's head, because of the swelling in the orifice of the trachea, cut it on both sides and make a large opening; and then open the windpipe and free the turban before it is uncovered.
And place the needle on that and let it enter into the other one, and then stretch the windpipe by double thread in two places - which causes you to lose your sense of smell when cutting two tracheas that are in the temples.
Then put the place where it is between two threads with a blade inside so that the blood comes out completely while dissolving the abscess.
And then administer a cure when poison is generated inside so that the limbs fall; and then heal it with water and salt to make it well.
And if it is an abscess because of venesection, then know that you have your hand on the patient's body, where there is a possibility of an abscess in the vein, and put the needle in the place that you have kept away from your hand, and let it enter; and make a double thread inside so that you extract one from the other side, and tie the abscess with both ends of the thread according to what I said to you about the uvula of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Maze if you are afraid to extract the thread, then put the needle into the abscess first, and then make four ties with the threads.
Then dry the abscess with a towel in its place so that when it is wet, let him cut the excess of the vein, and leave it water to make it well.
Then place on him the pillow that you have dipped in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with water and salt to make it well.
Take away from the patient the abscess which happens because of nerve twisting.
Thus an abscess may happen in the windpipe and vein, and may happen in the nerves because of blows or excessive work, and by chance.
This happens when the patient is in a place where he is not able to move his arms or legs, or in any other part of the body where joints are stretched.
And if it is a hard abscess, and it is the same color as the other side, and when it is hot with fever, you will feel the patient's body in a state of stupor.
And if it is not an abscess that is located in the front of the body, and therefore the vein is cut off from its head, and he becomes paralyzed all over, and does not move forward or backward.
Thus of those who are in joints, if you know that it is swollen because of iron, for strong iron would bring about the opposite effect.
Maze of those who are in the head or forehead with a blade. Maze if it is a small abscess, then know that you have your hand on the patient' side, and cut it out from its root.
And if it is large, then know that you have your hand on the patient' side, and cut it off, and then seal it off; and sew up the wound, and heal it so that it is well.
Take away.
Of section of an abscess which happens in the mouth and stomach.
Because when the abscess is in the mouth and stomach of men with hair on their bellies, and on their other parts of the body which are similar to mushrooms, whose roots are small and thick, and whose heads are round; and also because those who have long beards are similar to those who have a small beard.
And I have already seen one, and in his stomach there were two things that were like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, with very small roots.
And their lips were turned inside out, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Thus I cut those open and turned them upside down in the weight of eighteen pounds. and the other one was six inches long.
And the operation of cutting them is that you consider if the patient' body is wet, and the color of their flesh is white, moist, with small roots; then put the needle on both sides, and let it be in your presence while cauterizing the fire, because the dead tissue must be removed with blood; and if you cut off the blood, cauterize it.
And if the patient is a little scared and frightened, refrain from cutting with iron; but then take a fresh piece of lead, and stretch it on the white flesh, in the way that has been described; and leave it for two days.
Then tighten the tightness of the lead thread; then, do not cut the large piece of lead in half, so that it is cut and falls by itself because of its own work.
Maze if the piece of lead is large because of its roots, then there is no reason to be afraid or scared, and more so in that which is in the stomach.
Maybe you can cut off most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not come back to life.
Then heal that place so that the wound heals.
And know that you should not cut off a piece of lead which is of a dark color, has little feeling, and looks cold; for such a thing is cancerous.
And I came to remember the croc.
Take away.
Of cure of an umbilical cord.
The umbilical cord is caused by various reasons: or because of tears in the navel skin, and because of its thread or intestine, according to whether it is on one side or another; or because of blood flowing from a vein or artery, according to whether it comes from the front or back; or because of constriction of breath within it.
Maze if it is because of tears in the navel skin and because of the thread, then the color of the abscess will be like the color of the body; and it is painful, and it seems to come from different places. And if it is because of the exit of the thread, then know that the place where it is is different from what we have described, and when you press it with your fingers, it goes back; and very strong wind blows over it, and great work is done.
Maze if because of moisture, then it hurts when you touch it with your hand; and it is neither constricted nor extended.
And if it is blood, then know that the appearance of these signs indicates that the abscess is turning black.
Maze if it is because of meat, then the abscess is hard, thick, and durable, and it remains for a certain amount.
Maze if because of constriction of breath, then the touch of it hurts.
And the operation in it is that you consider if the prominence of the navel cord is because of blood or vein or breath; then know that the cure of it is forbidden, because in it there is fear and fear as I have taught you in the chapter in which I said about abscesses through the arceria and vena.
And if the prominence of the navel cord is because of the intestine or skin, then know that you command the patient to hold his ale with him, and keep it extended; and then turn it around in the path of all the navel, and then put a blade on both sides above the ale two times, and then cut off most of the abscess in the same path, and then stretch it out with a strong thread, and then tie it up tightly.
And so remove the baby from the apostema that extends over the ligament and insert this stick in there, and if you have not already done so, hold it in place with a strap. If you let go, take care to not dislodge it through the ligament; instead, push the baby out towards the inside of the belly.
And if you have already removed the membrane, then take that pointed stick; and cut away its excesses.
But if it is contrary to your fire or vein, then go around that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and attach them strongly to the wires and insert the two needles into the circle that you have made around the apostema in a way that they pierce through it; and then tighten the apostema on the four points where the needles are attached.
And if you want to, remove the needles and leave the hole open so that the extended flesh can fall away on its own; or cut it off where it is thin and then apply a remedy, and then take care of that part of the body that has been covered in ointment until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is made of flesh or because of moisture, then cover what you have cut off with this medicine as well; and remove any excess moisture that you have put on it, and then take care of that part of the body that has been covered in ointment until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the treatment of wounds.
We have said, in the division, of the kinds of wounds and in what way to treat them with medicine, and that it is useful in treating them with iron so that they are not ulcerated; and we have said that a wound is generated in the greatest care for its treatment.
And they said that some small wounds are in places where it is possible to eradicate them completely, such as the nipples or the hips, and especially when they are just starting out; and above all when they are very small.
But if it is old and big, do not cover it up, because the eye cannot heal such a wound on its own nor have I ever seen one heal like that, nor has it come into contact with water.
And the operation in it is that you go first and leave the patient and cleanse some wounds of black cholera, and then heal them if there is evident pus.
And then prepare the patient with the preparation that is suited for the operation, and then anoint with the trauc (a mixture of oils) those parts that cover it; and then dig deep from all sides with the knife so that there is no remaining cause of its wounds. And let the wound run its course, and do not wash it away, and squeeze out the pus, and rinse it thoroughly with your hand or with the instrument that you have at hand.
But if it causes you pain when you wash it, then cauterize that part so that the flow of blood stops, and then heal it with another treatment until it heals.
Chapter IV.
On the treatment of ulcers.
We have already mentioned, in the division, of the kinds of water ulcerations, and their characteristics, in the treatment of them with medicine.
That which is treated with iron alone is not the kind of algies that approaches towards tympany or hyposarcary, because water is deadly.
And when you have already treated this kind of ulceration with medicine and do not agree with your treatment, then be careful, because if the patient is cured or has another kind of ulceration (as one in the throat or abdomen that resembles this), then do not treat it with iron, for fear is on this water.
But if you find the patient to be of great virtue, and only has an ulceration, not child or old age, then the operation for it is that you raise the patient between your two hands, and the minister puts pressure on the abdomen with his hand, pushing water out from the top of the foot, and then take a narrow spike according to this form:
It should be of two sharp ends long, of the same sharp end as the spike; but above all it should be short, so that in the operation on it you do not pass into the abdomen, and so that you can feel it with your fingers.
And consider if the generation of ulcers is from the abdomen, because it is said that you move away from the navel by three fingers in the space between the legs, on the right side over the penis.
But if the generation of ulcers is from the genitals, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the blood, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not cover that your section is over the rib over which you want to operate on the patient so that the excesses do not run to that place.
And then pierce the instrument thoroughly, and insert it into that section, and raise your hand with the spike between your hand and the syringe, and squeeze it out; and if the amount is of a drop or less.
And then pierce the syringe so that the spike comes out at the desired location, and it is a place of water. And then take it out and insert an instrument like this: It is made of thin silver, or lead, or a kind of wood; and in its end are three holes, two on one side and one on the other; and it is made like a feather, as follows:
It is in the end of it that there is a ring, because when the instrument comes into contact with water, then that much of it comes out on one side, for if you let go of that much and do not cover it up at the right time, greatly harm the patient by the resolution of his own spirit, or you will come to five times closer to death.
But evacuate that second amount of its virtue, and according to what you find the patient's spirit is like, consider the disposition of his life from its virtue, and the goodness of it.
And then remove the instrument, and retain that water which causes it, because it is said that as much of it is retained by the codena which retains the mixture that is on the syringe; and according to what we have said, consider how you should pierce that second amount.
And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient is able to retain water, and evacuate a small amount of it, and make it run a little at a time because there is fear in it, and do not make an error so that it does not come into contact with water except a little.
But if you fear for the patient, and let go of a great amount of water, then heal it with burial in sand, and stir up the bath, and wait a long time; and heal it with desiccating medicines so that it heals.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the genitals are taken out of water according to what we have said that precedes it.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of children who are born with ulcers on their genitals, which do not perforate.
Some children are born with ulcers in their genitals (or the head of the mix) that do not pierce; or it is straight (or it is not in its place).
Then, when you have removed all trace of his urine as much as possible so that it is only left in the form of a small drop:
Then tie a small piece of lead and bind it; and do so for three days or 240 hours.
And when he needs to urinate, let him go as much as possible; then bring back that which remains.
And if you do not stop the lead, the urine that goes over this place will not stay on it.
And if the one from which you have taken it is thin, bind it with a piece of lead as we said before, for many days until it increases in size.
And if the one in which you have taken it is not in its place, and this causes it: because of what it does, that which was taken is at the top of the penis by so much as it rises above it; and is not due to generation, for then the semen cannot reach the mother according to its right way, and is a kind of disease.
And the way to operate is that the patient be placed on his back, and the head of the penis be extended with your left hand to facilitate its extraction; and cut off the tip of the penis at the place of the foreskin with a sharp blade, or if you do not want to remove any part of it, so that the head of the penis resembles the head of the penis and the taken one falls into its own place according to what has been said.
And remember that in your operation of the flow of blood, because it is possible that this happens: and stop it with blood, and cure the plague until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
About the growth that occurs on the foreskin of the penis, and black color and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
This growth appears on the penis, and it is a kind of flesh-colored mass.
And there are two types: one is malignant and the other is not.
Not-malignant, then suspend it with a small piece of thread and cut it off so that it does not grow again; and then bind it with egg and olive oil ointment; and then wash it with the ointment every day until it is healed.
And if this growth is malignant, of a dark color: then, when you have operated on it with a sharp blade and removed its roots, treat the wound with a pointed cautery.
If this growth is in the foreskin of the penis, and one part of it is inside the foreskin and the other part outside: then, when you have a part that is inside the foreskin at the beginning, treat it before it is consolidated; and then you treat the part outside, because when you treat that one with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And this has also happened in the genitals and in the foreskin: then, when you have completely conquered that which has already been darkened and is beginning to corrode or has been corrupted; and then wrap it with thread, with flour from a loaf of bread, and with three kinds of sand.
Then wrap it in this way, so that it is cured by the other treatment until it is healed.
If there is a flow of blood: then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
because the cauterization that helps the patient's condition is between two situations, as it helps with a flow of blood and with a corruption that is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and completely destroyed in the moment: then, when you introduce a piece of lead into the meatus of the penis through which urine passes through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that which has the foreskin, and on it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs by plague or pustule) then cut off with a blunt instrument so that it is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to cut off those neatly: then, when you cut off something from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and then, because the foreskin is thin, it is easily pierced by its subtlety in a subtle way.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a small blade, which has been made sharp by grinding it on stone; and then wash it thoroughly in water so that it does not adhere again.
Then let it be cleaned with caraway powder until it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
About the purification of children and the treatment of urine that occurs in those who have circumcision.
However, circumcision is not a solution for continence in this way as it is for other plagues: but since it is part of our operation and our will, and because its advantage belongs to those who have it, we will order that those who do not have it are circumcised, making it easier for them to achieve salvation.
So I say that the young people do not say circumcision in some of the free nations, because they do not use it according to their laws, and is only because we have acquired it by experience: so I have seen most craftsmen and barbers make circumcision and purification from urine; and they use a small blade for cutting and an egg for purification.
And I have already seen all of these ways; and I do not find any better purification with shears, with a small blade, which is used in purification with an egg, because it removes the skin from above, since the skin of the foreskin has two tunics, and the head of the penis remains between them, and is very strong: therefore, it forces another incision and hurts; and it causes pain. And the purification that is made with alkaline substances is not secure in the incision of the extreme end of the male member, because it enters into its trail very easily.
In the operation with an egg, it forces and corrupts your operation very easily. And the child's foreskin is short by nature, and there are growths that occur in this way, so that it does not require purification; I have seen this myself.
And the purification that is done with shears and a small blade is good; but experience has shown me that these are not suitable for incisions of varying sizes, because the accuracy of the incision that is made is thus: therefore, when you press your hand in a proportionate way, and then cut it according to a comparison at a time; and make a compression of the skin with a figure containing the head of the penis completely, with which there is no error.
And the way of the first operation is that you keep the child in a position higher than usual if it is small, and that you do not let the skin come out except by a small amount, and then release it on the following day.
Then return it with happiness in all this way; and that is your ability to respond to such a request. Then return it with a strong hand and not weak; and hide the shears in your hand or leave them outside so that the child does not see them or any other instrument.
Then place your hand on the head of the penis and blow into it; and draw it out so that the head of the penis comes out, and then purify it with water.
The form of the scissors for dissection, this is the form:
They should be sharp on one end and dull on the other, so that the blade of the knife does not bend, and its length should be the same as the length of two fingers put together.
There is an error in dissection because, if you cut through all the internal threads, or part of it, then the incision should be made from within.
So that you can reach out to your own finger in front of the location of the incision and make a second incision at the same length.
And if you cannot reach it with your own hand, then extend it with a hook and cut it with a knife.
But if it has been three days, and then you leave the wound open, so that the poultice remains in place, and cleanses it with ease, and makes the second incision, which has been prepared for you.
And take care of the head of the axe, because it will not be used again.
And so treat that wound with water that solidifies the poultice which we have described in the treatise on poultices.
And if the incision is made beyond measure and obeys the guidelines above, then it will not be known.
But treat that wound with water which we have said is to be healed.
Chapter LIII.
Of the Treatment of Urine Retentive in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstructions due to stones or calcification, or by an increase in the amount of urine or food, which are similar to those we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine is not dissolved with the water we have mentioned as vigorous, then place the instrument called a syringe, whose form is: It should be made of silver and be thin, like a long needle in similarity to a palm tree and half a tree; the cannula should be thin at its tip.
And the manner of passing urine through it is that you take the double knot and tie it to the end of the cannula with a good knot; and introduce the ends of the string into the cannula, and cut them off with scissors if there is any excess string; then insert the cannula into the urethra with force and introduce the liquid urine.
And let the patient lie on his back, and immerse the bladder in water, and rub it with oil and herbs.
And then introduce the cannula with ease until it reaches the tip of the penis; and double the end of the cannula towards the glans; and push the cannula into the bladder, and this should reach the patient's bladder, and no further action should be taken except to let it flow naturally, unless there is a blockage due to a stone.
And then extend the string little by little, because urine seeps through the cloth little by little.
And then remove it and treat with urine, and use a cannula; do not stop to let the water out and use a syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient relieved of his discomfort.
Chapter LIX.
Of the Quality of Bladder Irritation with a Clasp and similar instruments to those that agree with water.
When an ulcer or pustule occurs in the bladder, or there is a concussion in that part, and you wish to extract water and medicines from it, then use an instrument called a clasp, which is of this form:
but in its end it should be silent, so it is closed. And in that there are three holes: two of the same size, and the third is smaller.
In the beginning it is closed, so that water is retained in it and expelled when necessary; and it is thrown out with the water, and when it is thrown out, it is long, according to the quantity of what is inside, so that it can be used for the purposes of the sea.
Then when you wish to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clasp into the moisture, and push the water that is pressed forward out through the holes, because the moisture is pushed into the clasp's cavity.
And then insert the end of the clasp into the penis according to what we have described in the cannula; and push moisture with it, because that moisture will reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it.
The form of the thin blade that the bladder is to be massaged with, which is this form:
It should be made of silver or lead, the tip of which should be sharp and similar to a small feather, and the cannula should be thin inside.
And then move the bladder with force, and pause in it the moisture that you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and tie it between two strings of double knot, and heat that moisture on fire.
And then insert the end of the blade into the penis.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with moisture, and this should reach the bladder, and no further action is taken except to let it flow naturally.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and pierce that circle throughout its entire circumference; and then insert the double-knotted string through those holes, turning it as you go, and adding to it as you go, because you pause in that water which you wish to collect from moisture, and rub and add water.
And then you tie that in the instrument, and do as we have said about the bladder, and express it into your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LXVI.
Of Urine Passage.
We have already said about the varieties of urine and the treatment of it with medicines, and the difference between urine produced in the lungs and urine produced in the bladder, and the signs of either.
We have described the urine in which there is a catarrh, and its treatment with water.
Urine produced in the bladder itself is that which is retained in the bladder.
And I am narrating that same am explicit manifestation and abbreviation.
Therefore say that urine generated in the bladder most often comes from infants; and from the men of the man is that the urine that is discharged from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in the sand; and the patient rubs his staff, and leaves a trace, and is dressed; and if it does not come out in front.
Is the cure for children of that disease which they have acquired at twelve years old, and is difficult to cure in the elderly. Might be cured by water, since it is among those.
And of that which has more pain and the cure is less effective; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, let us come to the cure of that, with which we will baptize the patient with holy water, from which he will remove all the wound, since that wound is a cause of disease due to its investigation.
And let the patient be put on his feet and moved and massaged in order that the pain goes down into the pelvis of the bladder, or that it jumps from place to place, or some spots.
And let that cut between your hands be prepared, and the hands of him are left with cushions, so that the entire bladder hangs down between the cushions.
And then turn it over and all of it upside down.
Therefore, if you feel the pain in the space, then quickly lay him down on his side.
And if he doesn't stop completely from leaving him alone, then turn him over and apply oil to his back with the right hand; if the patient is a child, or the young are complete, apply it to their chest, and insert it into his buttocks. And turn over the pain that is in the space that is behind him. And turn that small one little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your finger, and expel that one from the space where you have placed it.
And order the minister to press on the bladder with his right hand; and order another minister, with his left hand, to stretch the genitals towards the armpits, and at the place where the cut is made.
Then insert your finger into the small opening which is there; this is its form: and cut through it with the knife that is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, moving from side to side of the left thigh; and make the incision over that pain and the right hand is on the buttocks, and make a transverse incision, so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the quantity that comes out of the pain to him is possible, and not more, since it is very strong, comprem the right hand which is in the buttocks; and then cut off its genitals.
And you should know that there is no pain to which it does not respond; and therefore the difficulty of its treatment by water is due to the fact that the relief from it is difficult.
And of that water is like a nut, and is round, and is easier to relieve by it.
Therefore if it is that which has no angle or margin, put it in the crack between.
And if it is not like that, then turn it over and put a piece of cloth on it, or squeeze it gently, the end of which should be on the pain, and do not remove it from him; or insert something sharp at its end.
Or if you cannot stand on it, then put a small pole under it, and if you see blood flowing from it, cut through it with a three-pronged pitchfork.
Or if the pain is more than one, at the beginning put your hand in the mouth of the bladder, and then cut through it; and then cut through a small piece nearby; and then if there are more than two points, cut through them.
And if there is great pain, then ignore that you cut it with a large incision, since this happens to the elderly because they do not have solid organs: or that it is due to continuous urine; therefore the place does not become solid.
Or minister expel from him that which is outside; or cut it with scissors within, so as to extract the piece.
Therefore when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with plant juice and blood of dragon, and strengthen it. And place a cloth over him wet in oil and vinegar, or in rosin and water rubbed together, so that it may congeal;
And then put the patient down on his side, and do not separate the members within three days.
And when that patient has separated, pour water and oil into the wound, and then cure it with a solution of salt and a solution of mercury within; for it will heal.
Or if in the wound there is congealed blood, dry and corrosive, and of that one seems as if the pain is frozen in the bladder, and therefore the urine is prevented from leaving the body; then insert your finger into the wound and extract the piece, since if it remains, it causes the bladder to corrode and decay.
Then wash the wound with oil, water, and salt; and in opposition to all kinds of food, with water that is used for drinking, and thus cure it within; for it will heal.
And at the times of all the cures that you have mentioned, put on both sides the cushions and place the medicines in the space.
And if the pain is small and is in the testicles, and is fixed there, and urine is prevented from flowing; then cure it with water, which I have mentioned before you come to the cut; for it will be that you take a sharp knife, whose shape is as follows:
of triangular point, thin, fixed at its base.
Then hold it firmly, and with the hand place the staff beneath him, so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the knife into the staff, piercing at ease within; for the piercer is able to pierce that pain. And turn the piercer over your hand in that small pain, and you will pierce the piercing of it from the other side; for the urine is soon discharged.
Then press your hand on it with the edge that is opposite to the pain of the staff, since that is sharpened, and is pierced by it; for the pain will be healed soon.
Or if this cure is not appropriate for you by any cause which prevents it from that pain, then hold one staff beneath him, and another above him; Then cut through the pain in the staff between two lines. Then remove it. And then separate the members and wash the piece with water.
It is not necessary to hold the staff under him so that it does not return to the bladder, but so that it does not leave; and when it is separated, the other one above, since when it is separated, the code returns to its place and hurts the wound.
It is necessary for you to raise the code above when you hold the staff; or it returns to its place, and hurts the wound, thus: "If it returns to its place, it will hurt the wound."
Chapter .lxi.
On the extraction of stones from the urinary bladder.
stones in the female bladder are rarely generated.
If there is a stone in either of them, then the cure is difficult and is prohibited by many manual techniques.
One of them is because the female bladder becomes stiff.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who can reveal if she has had sex when she is pregnant, or is a married woman.
And the third is that you do not have a woman who knows this art well, mainly for the operation of the hand.
And the fourth is that the place of section for stones in the female bladder is far from the place where the stone is, so as not to cause a painful section, and at that place there is danger.
But if necessity forces you to use water, then it is necessary that you take a pregnant woman who knows well, and she is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that, then look for one who is quick and subtle, or present an old woman who knows well the art of removing stones from the female bladder, or a woman who is skilled in this art.
Therefore, let her be presented, and command her to do all that you will send her, from the investigation of the stone to the start; which is why she watches if the woman is stiff, then she hides the stone in her buttocks and wants the stone.
Therefore, if she is found, let her be taken from her, and then command her to pierce herself.
But if she is not stiff, then command the old woman to insert her finger into the crotch of the patient and pierce it over the stone, since she puts her left hand on the bladder, and pierce the stone with a good grip.
Therefore, if she is found, then it is necessary that she gradually remove her finger from the orifice of the bladder to the end of its length, within which it reaches the root of the cushion.
Then pierce it on the tip of the finger with its length that goes from any part of the crotch to her stopped and centers the stone in that place, and the word of it is not taken out of the stone by piercing her with a sharp object from behind.
And the section should be little at first; and then insert the finger into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to its quantity, which I know that the stone will come out of it.
And you should know that the nature of stones is varied: some are small and large, and sharp and blunt, and some have edges.
Therefore, you should know how many kinds there are of water that you will use for each kind.
And if you want to stop bleeding, adjust it in the virulent place and pierce her for an hour until it stops bleeding, and then return to your operation before the stone is lost.
Prepare those instruments that are said in the extraction of stones from men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
And if you want to stop bleeding, and you know that the exit of blood is from the piercings that are made, then you pause dust on the place and stir it with powder and pressure downward, and do not repeat water; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because the female bladder will die. Then heal the wound.
Therefore, when the sharpness of the pain is reduced, the place will heal, then return to your operation before the stone is lost.
Chapter lxii.
On section over hernia.
Hernia is only an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which leaves the testicles contained in the scrotum, and it is called cipha.
And some testicles are in the proper scrotum, which nature has provided at the beginning of the testicle, so that it is separate from another testicle; and it is the membrane of the testicle between the white membrane that we have mentioned, and it is not water but wax.
And the generation of this hernia is by the disease that happens to the testicles, so that this substance is discharged there, and sometimes it happens due to injury made on the testicles.
This moisture is not colored, because its color is changing to yellow or bloody, or red, or black, or feisty, or white, and it is water that is more.
And the signs by which this accumulation of water can be found: because if it is in the white membrane that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round and slightly long, like a testicle's figure, and it appears the testicle, because the moisture contains all its parts.
If the moisture is in the proper scrotum, then the swelling is round at the beginning of the testicle, and thus one estimates that it is another testicle.
If the moisture is between the membrane of the testicles and the white membrane, then let him be silent.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture in the swelling, then look at the shape of its edge that is just inside the crotch; and according to the water that is discharged in the track of it, judge that it is on the inside.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of it by drinking, then let us order the patient to drink if water is possible for him, and wash his clothes with wine.
Then let it be placed on its two feet on a slight edge, and put away some sheets.
Then place yourself on the left side of him, and order the servant to follow the right side of him, which extends his staff between two rods at the crotch of the patient, and at the start of the miracle of the womb.
Then take a sharp knife and cut the membrane of the testicles from one side to another, within the fifth inch.
Then make the section according to a rule of distance from the line that you should follow with the hair of the testicles, so that it reaches the white membrane.
Then cut it, and observe, and keep it so that you do not pierce it; and your cutting of it on the side is more subtle than suspended on the testicle, and carefully examine the cutting according to the amount that is possible for you.
Then pierce the white membrane completely with a wide piercing, and drain all the water out.
Then separate the two sides of the section by a nail, and extend the white membrane to the end; and do not touch the membrane of the testicles together, and pierce the white membrane in that way that is possible for you. Then pierce it with its entirety or in pieces, and especially the white membrane, because if you do not examine carefully the piercing of it, it is not guaranteed that the water will not return.
But if the testicles are removed from him by his side in the hour of your operation, then when you have finished cutting the white membrane, return to them, and then adjust the two sides of the membrane together with sutures, and then heal those wounds as well as the others, so that they are healed.
And if the hernia is corrupted by another disease, then cover that part of the body with a cloth and remove it, and then treat it as described above.
If the water is divided into two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, cut the part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, do so.
Then clean the wound and put it in water or oil; then immediately put another cloth immersed in water or oil over the area, and spread out a double sheet and powder, and lay that open with this form:
and spread two sheets and be humiliated with wool according to this appearance; and be made the extremities pressed from a cover or wet wool, and be added to the structure in the breeches of the braces, and one of the extremities takes place between the two, and the other takes place at the split of the pantalon, and two extremities on two cousines left and two extremities on two angles, and all the structure is adjusted in the braces of the braces.
And some hernia is treated surgically instead of cutting it off; and it is that you take a sharp knife and cut the cord between the genitals, and burn it according to what we have described inside that it is discovered the white cipha containing water, and then you take a surgery according to this form: and it is assembled in the Greek letter.
Then pierce that cipha, and it burns inside that all moisture is lost.
Then remove the cipha with nails, and scrape it with a sharp knife, and burn it; then cut it according to what you can do so that you eliminate all of it; and guard yourself from the fire that the heat does not touch you.
And know that this operation is safer and further away from bleeding than cutting it; and better than an operation with cutting.
If you have any discomfort during the operation or cutting, or bleeding, then cover that part with a cloth according to what is said above.
If the patient is a little bit ill and does not hope for the second operation because of its horror, then administer piercing according to what I have described above; and it is when it is confirmed that that hernia is water-based.
Then cover that part of the patient on a high table, then pierce the swelling at the lowest part of the body with a spatula, and pierce according to the length of the body.
And be wide opening where all water comes out.
Then place your hand over the area and lift it up, and leave it in that position so that the water does not flow. Then treat that part where the plague is healed.
If discomfort is caused by the escape of water in that hour when you pierce it: and it does not happen unless the white cipha in the orifice of the plague causes discomfort and prevents the flow of water, then know that you put into the plague a penic or an instrument from which the water comes out, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust in the pressure of the plague a small.
And know that water returns, and is collected in a pot or vessel after three months or more; when it is added, then pierce according to this method, for the illness will last its days.
Chapter LXXXIII
On Surgery on Chasmous Hernia and Treatment of It.
Know that in the surgery on this hernia is a great danger of death in most cases; but I have seen its removal and survival thanks to it.
And I remember the operation on that one and the spices of the swellings.
So then I say that the swelling rises in the legs of those who are thin and it is caused by excess acute fluid: or by impact.
And it is the color of the swelling according to the color of the body, and does not hurt in pain, and the swelling is heavy.
And the swelling is hard to press, and its color is dark, and it does not feel to the touch.
And some swellings are caused by the inflammation of the nerves, and by the swelling of the veins; so that their presence is felt, or by the swelling of the veins.
If water is caused by the inflammation of the nerves, it is recognized by the disappearance of the swelling when you compress it with your fingers, and it does not hurt when touched.
If water is caused by the swelling of veins, it is not recognized by any compression with your fingers.
And it is possible that for this species surgery and on other bodies; and it is that you cut the cord between the genitals, and extract the humors from each part of the body, and tie them together, and cut them apart, and then treat them according to what has been described.
So if the hummus is already hardened on those bodies, then extract the hummus and cut it apart.
And if there is adhesion inside the cipha or between it and the veins, then cover that part with a cloth according to what has been described; and cut it apart with a round knife.
If there is birth of flesh in the place where the adhesion is located, which is behind, then cover that part with a cloth according to what has been said; and extract the hummus as described above.
Then, when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and water; then treat that part with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV
On the Treatment of Chasmous Hernia.
There is an swelling wrapped in a covering that resembles the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move or walk on the patient's leg.
And in the treatment of this illness is by fear for water from which its removal is preceded remembrance.
However, I will tell you about surgery on that one as well:
Then cover that part with a raised platform; and then place the suspenders of the testicles on each side of the body, and tie them to the genitals with threads tied around the waist, and tie them tightly so that they do not move.
Then cut across the bottom of the veins with a transverse section between the bayssels where they are visible.
And then scrape from each part as much as you have described in the removal of the nerves that are found in the veins.
And then keep one needle there where it is double and pierce that part at the first place where it occurs; and pierce another one further back in the same leg. Then cut them in half with a transverse section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupting moisture.
Then treat the plague with another treatment of the other plagues that you want to heal; so that they do not fall on the veins that connect the testicles, because it is dangerous for water to enter them.
And if all the vessels are stopped up, then know that either the testicles have been cut away or that the testicles for this reason lack nourishment through the vessel's incision, and are withered, or that they have been cut off in order not to be rejuvenated by them.
Chapter .lxxxv.
On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernias.
The arrival of this hernia is due to an incision which extends across the abdomen on either side of the navel, so that some of the intestines are separated from the rest by that incision, and some of them come out through it.
And this incision is either from the navel itself or from an enlargement of it, and such things happen for different reasons: either by pounding, or by loud noise, or by sudden movement, or because of some heavy cause, or because of a similar event.
And the sign of this is that it happens little by little over a long period of time and not suddenly, and it is pus inside the navel, pressing against the intestines from within, so that the navel compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it happens by incision in the navel, for at the beginning great violent pain occurs suddenly; and there are pus-like emissions close to the navel, and this is due to the intestine being pressed from within, and the skin splitting in places next to the navel.
And some of them are left without a covering membrane, and this is called an intestinal hernia called zibural.
And some of them become swollen and some of them run in the intestine, and here it is re-absorbed, and this causes great pain to the patient, and more often than not when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these diseases, it is necessary to take care not to damage anything, so that the incision should be made with care at that place.
And the way to operate on it is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity if he obeys your instructions for returning it, and then place it over his chest between your hands, and raise his legs.
And then cut the cord that connects the testes to their upper parts, and incise the whole length of it, and then place it between two blades of the incision as you would like to open the incision for them.
And if there is a lack of amount that can be obtained from it, then cut off part of it.
And then remove that navel, which is covered by the cord of the testes, until it is completely uncovered, and cut off the navel's upper part where it is hard and white.
And then place the patient so that his testes are above his navel, and this is between the white navel and the second navel, and below the attachment that is in the back of the navel.
And then cut off the cord of the testes at their upper parts, and extend the white navel to its left side, and raise the navel to the part of the incision; and order the minister to extend the navel above it, and you dissolve the attachment that is behind with a complete solution.
And ask by the patient's testes whether there is any cause for the navel to be wrapped in the hard white navel. And if you find no cause, then place that navel on the abdomen.
And then make an incision in the cord of the testes by incising its lower parts, and this is the incision that causes pain and healing as we have described above.
And then administer a soaking of oil and place it in the incision, and then bind the thread that we have described (and sometimes the hard navel is cauterized with an incision as it is the cause of a flow of pain, because sometimes it happens) and leave the thread inside so that it falls.
And if the oil does not work, then water is boiled and poured on, and placed on it so that it falls as we have said.
And this cure for the wound with another treatment for wounds within the time that is needed to heal.
Chapter .lxxxvi.
On Ventilated Hernias.
In this hernia, it is not seen that anything has been done to treat it in order to cause pain.
And the first ones said that it happens in such a way as we have described in the hernia that is on the navel with ease of movement; and then dry up its location by applying an incision to it from all sides, so that the vessels come out.
And this cure for the wound as we have said within the time that is needed to heal.
Chapter .lxxii.
On Discomfort in the Thighs:
And sometimes the hernia ruptures in the thighs as we have said, and emits its location.
And they do not give any cause for the navel to the genitals; and if they do, then this is little; and in a short time return, "for so often as it does."
And if the time is prolonged with it, then a small crack forms in the navel within the navel's upper part; and this happens by the extension of the navel as we have said, and becomes soft at its location and emits pus.
And this cure for it is like cauterization as the previous description of it precedes.
And sometimes it is cured with fire in this way: the patient sits on their buttocks between your legs, and then dry up the location of the rupture by incising for three times.
And make it tighten the white scarf that is under the knot so that it is not discovered.
Then take the rope and place it over the upper part of the scarf, and put it around the stomach.
Then cut the two upper points on the end of the scarf, and sew one to the other.
Then remove the end of the rope and do not cut it from the scarf completely, nor spread the intestines, nor for any other reason do I want you to know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And for the treatment of boils, and when you cut the scars, wash it well and restore the boil before it hardens; because the scarf contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
The cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Chapter .lxxxviii.
On the Softening of the Testicles.
In some men, the testicles are softened by water because the flesh between them is softened, and attention must be paid to this.
Then, for the treatment of him who is treated, it is necessary that he lie down according to his back and chest, and sew all the testicles together that are softened on the natural string; and when he has made two slits, one above and one below, cut through both.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened testicle with three or four cuts and a firm stitch.
Then cut between the stitches; then treat other boils for healing, and let the scars fall off.
Chapter .lxxxxi.
On Castration.
Know that in our law castration is forbidden, except for the sake of an argument in this book; and it is not necessary to recall that argument unless I remind myself of it, which concerns the science of the doctor when he is asked about the cure of him who has been castrated; and the other way is that we may have need of castration of other animals for the benefit of our own, in case of rams, and goats, and pigs, and animals like them.
Then I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting from behind or by cutting with a section.
Except that which is done by cutting from behind; the way of the operation is that you make a cut in the animal's tail within, so that its genitals are softened and weakened and they hang down. Then take them by your hand within so that they are relaxed and do not appear to be loose with the touch.
Except for castration by cut and section, if you have the animal, and press the testicles of it with your left hand.
Then take the suspenders, and cut on each side with a section so that two cuts are made.
Then cut those again as you would cut an Excort. Do not cut over the scarf for any reason except that which is over the veins.
This way of castration is better, because it cuts from behind, so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
Then heal the boil before it hardens.
Chapter  .lxxx.
On the Treatment of Hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is due to two ways: one is because the space between the testicles is closed, which forms a penis-like figure because of confusion of the male sex organs; and another is that the female organs appear because of confusion of the male sex organs.
Some men have a flow of urine from the testicles.
Except in some women, who have a male penis: it is like the confusion of the male organs; and because the scrotum of the woman is like that of the man and two testicles.
The treatment is of three kinds: of two men's kinds, and of one woman's kind. It is because you cut those tissues together within so that it escapes the smell of the animal, and then treat them with treatment for other boils.
In the second kind of men from whom urine flows from the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation.
Chapter .xxi.
On the Lancing and Cutting of Flesh for Female Causes.
A strong lancing is adjusted on natural causes within which is distended and is done with care; and in some women, it is increased to such an extent that it affects the sexual intercourse.
Then take the excess of lancing with your hand or a knife and cut it.
Do not end in incision, especially on the head of the razor, so that it does not cause bleeding.
Then heal those with treatment for boils within which is healed.
Except for hidden meat which is within the animal, and it has a strong taste that disturbs the stomach; and I cut that with lancing, and heal those within which are healed.
Chapter   .lxxxii.
On the Treatment of Ulceration.
Ulceration is that the woman' s hole not be pierced, or it is a small hole. It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is by bad meat which has preceded, and that is made or by unnecessary meat adjusted or by subtle string or hard.
It is made or in the head of the mother, or on its sides, or on the upper part of it, or on the lower part of it, and it prohibits cutting and impregnating and procreating; and strongly prohibits menstruation.
The knowledge of that is done with care if the opposition appears, then it is not known; but if it does not appear, then you ask about that with the ditz or the rope.
Except if the opposition is by subtle string; and it is between the two points, then you cut and break that.
It is because you put your hand on both sides of the opening, and you put the ditz or rope between them in advance.
The woman is under her two points, her legs extended, and you open the two points with force within which the subtle string of that is broken, and if opposition appears, then it is not known.
Then take a piece of wool and tie it on the area with four knots, and keep it on that location to prevent it from becoming hardened.
Except if the string is thick and hard, then cut that with a sharp knife or a piece of glass.
Except if the opposition is by meat, then hang that with a rope, and cut it.
There are three medicines which stop the flow of blood: namely, bitter salt and acacia, and dragon's blood and ensets, adjusted to the skin of a goat.
Then administer a broad copper tube so that the boil is not hardened too quickly.
Hold that for many days and administer a liquid medicine.
Then it is healed with another treatment of consolidation within which is healed.
Sometimes, in the mother' s birth, other meats appear; and then cut according to this way. If so is it for a hard apoplexy, to the hard apoplexy that is in the main is not made an opposition with any kind of way.
Capitol LIII.
Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids and of the Tail and of the Red Botor that Occurs in the Conches of Women.
Emorrhoids so appreciate of the outlets of little veins within that of those come out slowly continually; and when emorrhoids are old and are made.
And I have already said in the division the spices of those and their signs, and direct them also those that I receive cure and those that I do not receive cure.
Therefore say that emorrhoids and those when they are in the front of the main and do not appear to the feeling, in those is not made cure by any means.
But those that are in the outlet of the main on which there is a sensation, are those that are cured.
And where you put the woman in a smock to rub and approach them with scissors or a sharp cloth, and cut them with the nails.
And you should sprinkle on them the flow of the juice of one of the powders that are cut with a mordication, so also to acacia and similar to those.
And you should tie their feet for an hour, and place them in fresh water.
And if the flow of the juice persists, then make them boil in a decoction of sumac and of rashes of milgranas and of gualas and similar.
And you should prepare flour from wheat and make them a paste with honey and vinegar, and apply it to the two of them.
And if the juice is cut off, so it is; and if not, then make them adhere to the two vents, and to the nipples make a cutting.
And you should prepare wool and dip them in juice of coriander or in juice of arnagloza or in juice of guava with five parts of water, and make them adhere to the place; and cure the place with a hot poultice where it is.
And cure that place where it is sanable.
Capitol LXIV.
Of the Perforation of Hardening that Occurs in the Main.
Little spices of hardens occur in the main, so also when it is hard and the apoplexy that is like a diamond and ulcers and adhubela and erpetrombres and fistulas of emorrhoyds and rugosities and thyle and other hardens. And I have already said these malignancies and the spices of those and their signs, and the cures of them in the division.
And where I say in this treatise of hardens how it is done to the main when they are hardens that you have made them sanable, and if you want to know how the operation is done by any means.
Then consider if the pain of the hardens in its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that hardening and if it appears on it a feeling, then do not make its perforation, but cure it with water that helps over the maturation within that stops the acuteness of the accidents.
And then if you have made the woman lie on a bench that has two benches; and place her on her back with her legs open from her belly, and her cushions are spread out, and pause her hands from her sides, and tie some to a rope conveniently to water.
And the midwife should follow from behind and administer the instrument with which she will make an opening in the outlet of the main, the form of which will come about in those cases that she will do it properly.
And where you want to administer this instrument, then you should lie on your back with the woman's legs open from her belly, and the water that comes out of the instrument is not more than the front of the main and the whole of the patient's clothes. But if the instrument is larger than the front of the main, then consider that you should not make any opening in the front of the main by any means.
And consider that you should not make any turning that runs in the instrument above it, and that the minister holds the instrument and makes a turning within that it is made an opening in the outlet of the main.
And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is wet, then consider that you should not make a cutting in those with a sharp tool.
And when the sanable is evacuated, then consider that you should make a cutting in those with a submerged blade in rosin or green oil, and pause the hair in the division of the front of the main.
And you should not make any opening in the main and over a five-pointed lamb's wool that is clean and submerged in water where the mauve colors are dissolved.
And it should be sanable by any means, and by applying a hot poultice within two days that is sanable.
And some are washed with the main and the shower that is made by water and honey, and you should dip them in a water where the hair of the lamb or of the horse's mane is dissolved, and then return to the poultice.
And if the shower is within the main that has been washed, then consider that you should not make any cure by any means.
Capitol LXV.
To Teach Midwives in What Way the Eager Bus Men Are Curable When They Are Said According to Figure That Is Not Natural.
A necessary cause is that the midwife should know in the beginning of the natural childbearing according to signs of it, and is when you see the woman express herself at the separations and desire to smell the air, and over it is absorbed by water that comes out from it that is about the birth, and hastens its excitement, then know that this birth is a second figure that is natural, and is the excitement of it on its head, and the second to hang or to suspend from its navel.
And then when you see these signs, then consider that the woman's belly is agitated so that the childbearing does not become heavy gradually when it comes on its head, then turn it over, and it is free from those superfluous things with good purification.
But that which is the other of this birth is not natural and not fit, because when the excitement is on its back and the body is turned to its head and the hands to its feet, then the mother of it turns her over, or at its feet. Or it is turned on the woman's head and the mother of her, or at her belly, and firm is turned to its hip, and resembling figures are not fit.
A necessary cause is that the midwife should be wise and subtle in all causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
And I am showing you those figures, and what meaning there is in them by water that comes out of them and stands on it.
And when the excitement is turned on its head by natural strength and that is violent with the woman, and difficult is made the birth, and sometimes the virtue of it is already weakened, then consider that she should not cut it. But if the women hold her, and make a perfume from fenugrec and green oil.
And bring the measuring stick between his little finger and the thumb, or cut off that one with the knife, for there is moisture in it. And press the woman's belly within so that she may give birth.
If it does not come out, then cover the woman with a blanket so that she may be warmed by the sun.
And order him to be rubbed and pressed, and let him sneeze with the cold; and place his mouth and nose for an hour, because the child will soon come out.
And if the two children are sneezed on at the beginning, then cover yourself with a light cloth. If you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a stool and lift her feet up, and then strike the stool against the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall down due to the blow.
And if the last two are not turned inside out and the child dies, then cut those off and take the navel string from the child or tie it tightly around it, because it will soon die.
When the child comes out on his feet, then cover him with a blanket, and turn the child over, and take a foot of him, and stretch it little by little.
But when the child is born between the thighs, then order him to be pressed and let him sneeze with the cold, for he will soon die if God wills it.
And if it is not born with the water that I have mentioned, then return the child little by little until you reach his second nature, for he will soon die if he does not come out with the second birth.
And if it is forbidden by all the water that I have mentioned, then take the mustard and the dissolved gum, and strike them all together in a mortar with a good strike, and pour the congealed blood of the woman, the highest part of her belly, into it. Then form a ring in running water within which you will keep the sick person.
And when the wounds of the patient no longer bleed, then give him mint smoke to inhale and make him breathe through the nose. When the mint smoke has been inhaled for an hour, then place him on a stool and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and remove anything from it, and press his lower abdomen gently, because the child will soon come out.
Of the fetus' emergence from its mother's belly hanging one of its members. It should be born in a reduced state from the mother's womb, but if it cannot be reduced, then raise the woman and let her go down.
If she cannot go down, then place her on the ground, and strike those who are with her with a violent blow, and administer to them the drugs that I have mentioned and others.
If the child has been born, then place him on a stool and study his reduction from the mother, and take the second child according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and order her to be pressed so that she may be born.
Of the fetus' emergence on the back expanded members and the foot of it is at the second place from its mother. Then may the woman take the child's head and gently turn him little by little, and he will come out easily.
And when it is and how long it takes to be swallowed up, then place it on the congealed blood that I have mentioned of oil and mucus.
Then order him to be rubbed little by little, and when he comes out, then form a ring on the right side of the body and make him sneeze with the cold. Exit: The preparation of the exit for the child.
When it comes out horribly from the mother according to this method, consider it, and then you will open the second one with your hand within that is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus hangs over the face of the neck, then you will open it up, so that it is not held and it does not die.
Then you make the child ready within his members before opening the second one, so that it may come out with its first nature if God wills it.
Exit: The exits of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are different types of vision, and sometimes there are three or four, but they are strange to the world, but in nature they are dead, and not alive.
And if there are two, then they are different types, and sometimes there are three or four, but they are strange to the world; and in nature they are dead, and not alive. And sometimes a second one is born by natural birth, which is good; and sometimes two are born at once from one womb, and sometimes it is strange; and if there are two or more, then they are different.
And if it is difficult for them to be born in a natural way and come to water that I have mentioned of the figures not natural, then you take care of them as I have mentioned.
If the mother is subtle and the foot of her is at the right place in a subtle way, and with delay, then she will be prepared according to all figures by means of engineering for her salvation.
Remember that it is formed in the mother's womb from embryos, and some are aborted.
Some are formed in the mother one, two, three, four and five, and already it is necessary that a woman aborts six times, and another seven to all, which causes it to be made by measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this time I have been saying that it is in the science of the mother because it is a strong light to that little thing which seems like water, and therefore pause there at the water.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the child's extraction when it is dead.
When you heal the child who is dead in the womb with water that I have mentioned in the division of medication and it is not a matter of external exit, then you must use surgery on the mother, for you consider whether the woman is of sound health, and she is not exposed to an accident for which she may be a loss.
The woman should be placed on her back, with her head slightly raised and her legs elevated.
The minister should hold her two parts in place so that the contents of her womb do not spread out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mother’s mouth with honey, and add to it a little oil of aloes and fenugreek and seed of lyme.
Then anoint the mother’s hands with these oils and ointments, and place her hand at ease on the womb so that the fingers rest on the fetus.
Then place it in a convenient spot: then consider if the fetus is ready to be delivered; then you can put your fingers on its neck, or on its collarbone, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or leave them on its beard, or on the pit of the stomach, or on the ribs, or near the hips.
But if it is to be delivered in the feet, then place it either in the pentene (footbed) or near the midriff of the body.
Then let her keep the finger on the right hand, and place the bent elbow in that spot between the fingers of the left hand; then, with ease, introduce the finger into one of these spots which we have mentioned, until it reaches the cause of the swelling.
Then place another finger in apposition with it, or the third if necessary, that is to say, so as to create a hook, and not an extension, following the directions of the doctor only then.
And if it is necessary that its removal be complete at once, so that the swelling of the body may be relieved immediately with a single extraction.
And if it is necessary that its extraction be soft; and if a part of it has been retained, then the woman should anoint herself with oil, and gently turn herself so as to reverse the water that has been retained.
Then if the fetus has come out in part, let the fingers be exchanged for another spot where it is to be delivered, and do this repeatedly until the entire fetus is delivered.
But if the hand is in front of the other, and it cannot be reduced by the constriction; then let it be wrapped around itself, and extract it piece by piece until the whole is delivered, and mark it or the joint of the hand or the wrist.
And finally cut off the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or the constriction comes in its delivery, or it is caught up in the water, then introduce an instrument called an 'unclinger', the shape of which will correspond to the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter that deals with this.
And if the head of the fetus is large by nature, then mark it with a stiletto or an unclinger as we have said above; and with forceps extract the bones.
But if the head has come out and is constricted at the pit of the stomach, then cut it open so that the moisture that is in the feet may flow out.
But if this does not cause complication or delay in its delivery, then you can cut off the head at once as quickly as possible.
But if the fetus that has been left in the womb is pus or is in the bowel, then pierce it so that the moisture that is inside it may flow out.
But if the fetus is on top of the legs, then its gravity will easily bring it down and its direction to the mother’s mouth is also easy.
But if the fetus is constricted at the navel, then extract it with cloth wrapped around your hand, and cut open the navel so that the moisture that is in it may flow out.
But if the other members remain obstinate and turn towards the head, then let the woman place her left hand; but if the mother’s mouth is open, then introduce the hand into the throat of the woman, and with it pick up the head, and with the fingers grab one or two fingers at a time, and pull them back into the mouth.
But if the mother’s mouth is constricted by pus due to an ulcer, then do not touch it with your hand; instead, administer a stream of watery liquids. And apply plasters; and follow the patient with water that softens and moistens.
But if the fetus is on top of the ribs, then, if possible, let it be wriggled; and water that softens the body should also be applied to the live fetus.
If water cannot reach it, then cut it off into pieces, and extract it.
Then let there be no delay in delivering the second child.
And when you have completed your entire procedure, then administer the water for cleaning that we mentioned above in regards to the woman.
If there is bleeding during delivery, then stop it with stiff water and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in her womb with a dead fetus, and another live fetus that is being born; and the second one was born dead. Then there occurred a long time of pus due to an ulcer on the womb, and it became inflamed inside until it burst, and then it began to bleed.
And he was called to treat him, and he treated him for a long time, but the plague did not become fixed.
Then you used some strong plasters for the purpose of attraction, and broke one bone from it, and let a few days go by, and another bone was broken; and I was amazed that there was not a bone in her womb.
Then you realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then you treated the plague with medicine, and extracted a few bones from it; the woman was in her own hands, and I have been treating her for a long time, and a small bit of blood came out of her.
And I did not find this strange, but I found that in water there is wisdom and help for the woman through medicine administered by hand.
Of the shapes of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
The shape of a spinning top by which the mother is turned:
This is the shape of strength with which the free ones are grasped; and with this grip, two spins are made in two ends of two fetuses. But this spinning top may be more subtle than the previous one, and it may be made of wood or metal or leather.
And the length of each stick is a palm and a half; and the distance between them is a palm and a quarter; and the width of the top is two palms wide; and the thickness of the wood or leather is a palm and a half wide.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that she is opened up when you turn the two prescribed wheels.
A different shape, similar to that of a small pestle, and then made light:
Then make it from ebony or boy's wood according to the appearance of forceps. However, at the end there are two additions as well, and the length of these additions is a palm, and their width is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother, then place her with her legs hanging down, and cover her with a cloth. Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with a pair of pliers according to the quantity that you want of the impression of the mouth of the mother before the master tells you to stop.
The shape of the wheel that they told the ancients:
A shape that is driven by force:
A shape of a hammer that crushes the head:
And it is assembled with forceps on the end, as often as needed, and some are made long, also with forceps according to this shape, as often as needed, which are inserted and carved, and then they are crushed and inscribed. A small shape of a hammer:
A single-pronged hammer:
A double-pronged hammer:
A double-ended hammer with a cuthead:
Two long hammers:
All of these instruments are used, and when less is needed of the substance of that one and it is prepared by the craftsman, how much is easier to do the operation and how much fewer hands it needs for its quantity.
And you should not use those instruments anymore once you know how to operate without them, because the need for those is not justified.
Of extraction of the second one.
When the second is retained, it should be commanded to the mother that she hold her breath, and if it is too much, it will come out, it is good.
And if not, then take a branch and pierce the cover with it, and stop it in that place with care and roughness, and anoint it with camomile and sicodes Arabic, and cassia lignum and Staeura. All of these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the branch, and stop it over the fire.
Then place a tube of camomile into the mouth of the mother, and hold it so that the vapor goes into the cavity of the mother.
Then make her sneeze with a handkerchief held close to her face, and the second one will be blown out.
If this cure does not work and the second one is not blown out, then order the mother to dip her left hand in olive oil or a mixture of althaea, and insert it into her mouth, and search for the second one, and when she finds it, remove it little by little according to what is necessary so that the mother does not hurt herself with the attraction of wind. And let her switch sides easily.
And if the mouth of the mother is blocked, then we have already described the cure with sneezing and the medication of the branch with herbs.
If the second one is not blown out with all of these means, then you must remember that whatever comes out of the mouth of the mother lies on the floor, and then crush it with oil and honey, and taste it; because this will make it stick to her teeth, dry it, and blow it out.
Then when it is crushed, it has a bad smell to the head and the stomach, and the mother swallows it; and then order that it be administered sublingually and conveniently with water.
Some of the Ancients have already prescribed sublingual administration of nasaltor and dried fig.
A shape of an instrument that is used to administer nasaltor to the woman, which is effective for menstruation and the second one:
A pot of vinegar or iron.
Then the sharp end should be inserted into the cavity, and the wide end should be placed over the fire, and sublingual administration should be made on the fire braids.
Then hold it so that it is consumed by sublingual administration and repeat as needed.
Of cure for the bottom of the unperforated child.
The bottom of the child is not perforated, and these are treated with a subtle and soothing mixture. Then order the mother to pierce her own bottom with that mixture; and if not, pierce it with a sharp hammer, and be careful not to touch her anus.
Then place the heated, oil-soaked cloth over that area and then treat it with a mixture of honey.
If you fear that it may be pierced, then place a tube of caustic dye in motz days, and stop it when the child wants to urinate.
Then that bottom may be pierced by consolidation of plague or abscess; if that consolidation is inscribed, and then it is cured with water that we have described with the medicine and the pound.
Of cure for the fistulas that involve the genitals.
Fistulas involving the genitals are treated with a mixture of oil and honey, and grossness is added according to what involves the anus or in the space between the genitals.
Then it is a fistula or motas.
With that mixture, it is ancient and runs from the watery white pus or subtle puss, and some of these fistulas are penetrant.
And those that penetrate are recognized by water that is blown out from them due to wind and exit with it; and some times the exit of water is helped by a wind, and they come out quickly.
And some of these fistulas are hidden in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and within the meat of the testicle; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the cocksuckers, and into the neck of the scrotum.
And water that is conoguda from a fistula that penetrates into the buttocks and does not penetrate, you put the child's bottom in it, and try gently to pierce the fistula when it is not painful.
If that is painful, then insert a sharp object into the fistula gently when you feel the pain or the hair on the child's bottom.
And if you do not feel that or it does not come out with the tube for any reason of passage or wind; then you will know that it is non-penetrant, and then continue with the cure.
When the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the testicle, then the sign of it is certainly of urine from that place and prohibition to go there so that the medicine does not solidify.
If it is penetrating within the joint of the thigh or within the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then its indication is that the tentation was penetrating here if there is not a turbulence within the bone, and causes pain in the circulation of the exit; and that it always remains injured; and that it does not help with that medicine, nor is strengthened by drinking.
And in all these penetrating ulcers there is no cure for everything, and the cure of those is work and vanity of the doctors on which they are closed.
But in that which is not penetrating and does not age, cure by iron is expected according to what you recommended, and what I have already done and tried.
And the patient lies between your two thighs and raises his legs within them, the spaces are inclined toward the abdomen of him, and then put a plunger or iron if there is turbulence, so that you know the place where the tentation enters.
And if it feels a patient's hip, then cover that you put your hand in the hip.
And if you feel in the patient' hip that the tentation has already penetrated through it, or between the hip and some flesh or meat, then know for sure that it is penetrating; and do not work with that, because it is not cured with that, as I have said.
But however, some say that it heals in some men quickly.
And of the medicine by which is hoped for quick healing is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the ulcer, and then put it into the ulcer until it enters through the hip; and repeat it twice or three times until you know that all those injured flesh that is like feathers of an eagle has closed.
And that one is cured with calumes wrapped in a blanket until all the flesh that is aderent has closed, and that one is cured with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, it is not cured with any other cure.
And if the tentation enters and does not penetrate into the hip that is in the hip, and between it and the tentation that is a little flesh or meat, and sometimes the ulcer on what part of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the ulcer, then cut the skin with a sharp knife, and if you see that it is drying, then know that the tentation has been cut in that place where the end of the tentation has reached; and by the tentation it is freed and goes away.
And then wash those ulcerated flesh that are like tubes of an eagle's penises, and they do not get irritated by any other cause.
But if there is a flow of blood several times that comes between you and your work when you are cutting those flesh, then the water that is hot or the acute medicine is to be cauterized by fire or medicine, because cauterization by fire adjusts well: so it is aderent from those flesh that are close, and removes the scald of humidity.
And that one is cured with calumes wrapped in a border or a thread until the place gets dry, and then it cures the plague with iron that hardens flesh and generates and consolidar.
And thus medicines in which there is strictness and excision; and when restored, it is healed, and you do not fear recurrence.
But if the ulcer has already penetrated into the hip and its length is on the surface of the flesh, then put your hand in the hip and examine it.
And if the tentation is a hundred and between you and it is a little meat or flesh, and it is about to penetrate, then do not operate on it unless by means of trust and hope.
The cause is to administer it in it in one of three ways: or cauterize it as I have said; or dry it up within that you can get into the hollows and the proper cure comes; and do not process with a cut because you will not injure the skin containing the hip, and you will arrive at the desire of the one who wants to; and then heal it with water which I have said because strong man cures; or extend that little meat and make that pus which you dry up within that you can get into the hollows, as I have said, or with the tentation or with another instrument with a sharp extremities, and then wash those ulcerated flesh that are in the cut within the hip, as I have said, or with the tentation or with another instrument of sharp extremities, and then dry those flesh that are in the cut within the hip, as I have said; and then try to make the restoration of all the plague with a cut, and if the pus hole above does not consolidate, and the ulcer opens again at the beginning of the hip, and the little pus goes up through it. And some ulcers are cured in this way: it is when you put the tentation into the ulcer, and it is at the hip's side on the surface of the flesh toward the cord, and then take an attempt with a sharp point, which is as when you prepare the threads according to this form:
And then enter into that veil wrapped in five fields or put your hand into it; and then enter the tentation into the ulcer within that you can get into its hollows.
But if it is penetrating into the hip' side inward, then you take the veil from that and put your hand in it; and then enter the tentation into the ulcer within that you can get into its hollows.
And then heal the plague within that it is consolidated and healed.
But if the hole of the ulcer is not penetrating, then do so in some way that you prepare it, but not inside it, because it is not to you that you make it pass so that you do not injure the skin; and then do so within that it is healed.
The form of a spike with which the ulcer is divided: its curvature is sharp and the other part is not-sharp, so that you do not injure what is necessary, as when it happens sometimes.
Suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Emorrhoids are like grass that grows in the hip, and those are with a thick skin. And they are small and large, and the blood runs from them at the same time and is one, and they are little, and outside of the hip, and in its extremities.
But those that are outside of the hip are according to the middle of a little humidity, from which runs yellow water or a little blood constantly on the skin, and according to the color of the skin.
And the cure of that which is inside the hip is to order for the patient to lie on his side and to press it until the hip burns, and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you cut yourself and hang them by a nail that you have or with your own fingernail, and then cut those veins.
But if the fingernails do not have them because of their humidity and softness, then take them with a sharp nail or a piece of wool or a flannel, and cut those veins with your fingers, and then wash those and sprinkle over them some dust after cutting, so that they are like those in a place of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what has been said. And so continue with the cure until they are healed.
And if the buttock does not yield to exit, then cut the hernia in half with a sharp knife, and wash it with that water which is in the buttock and which yields to exit easily when the hernia is cut.
If the haemorrhoids protrude from the buttock, then the cause of them is easily removed, and it is because you have taken them with your finger, or with a scalpel, and cut them, and so continue with the cure until they are healed.
And whoever wishes to make an incision, follow this method: take a tightly wrapped cord and insert it into a needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids by their parts, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the cord around the part below the needle, and then release the knot; and then firmly tighten the knot, and then remove the cord and extract the needle.
And let the water run over all of them, and leave one of them untouched, so that the excess blood flows from that one.
Then place a cloth drenched in rose oil or wax over the buttocks, and place that one over the buttock and order the patient to lie down. Then leave that one in a box; and when it falls, cure them with oil or with another cure until they are healed.
And since such things are not effective in that medicine, then it is said that you should cut them with a spatum or with your finger, so that they bleed profusely from above, and this prevents their solidification; and so continue with the cure until they are consolidated.
Then you should cut them with a sharp razor more violently than the first, since the pain of the first incision will prevent them from healing; and so continue with the cure until they are healed.
Be aware that almahiram is a final cure, and it is not unless the color of the body becomes similar to the tip of a clove, and it affects the whole body, especially the feet and the legs, and through them one should experience pain in general.
And then it is said that the water which is in the circle of the ring should be cut with a pair of scissors or with a scalpel, and removed from its root; and so continue with the cure.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one which precedes the first in the head.
A small, round, sharp-edged, raised mole is often seen on the surface of the body, and it is sometimes found in children.
The cure for him is to spread him and cut him, or to extract him with a string that binds him. And if you wish, cauterize the water, as has been said, with fire or with acute medicine.
A small, round, rough mole is often seen on the surface of the body, and when it comes in contact with it, it feels like a tiny burn; and it forms a blister on the skin.
The cure for him is to take a pen of cow or of bull, and make it hard, and place that one over the mole which is enclosed by its circle; and then turn your hand around the pen so that water runs from the circle of the mole; and then cut the water with the pen within the circle of the mole, and place your hand over the area where the mole was, and eradicate the mole from its root.
And if you wish, make water run through an iron or brass tube according to this form:
The opening of the tube should be small, dull (if it is not pierced), wrapped in such a way that it does not damage the tube, and its revolution should be made by the hand.
And if you wish, cauterize the mole according to this which is said in cauterization of atheyl in the head.
Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give a cutting.
Some are given a cutting of silver or lead or of melted brass or hammered ; and some are given small instruments and large according to those which are used, since the instrument which is used in the treatment of small children should be small; and that of the instrument which is painful or painful to the patient, the cuts should be small.
The shape of a large cut and a small one:
The top of the tube should be wide according to this method: and it should be distinct where the bag is attached in such a way that it does not touch the tube.
And the end of the tube which enters the buttock should be dull  (if it is not open) and sharp at its tip; and there should be two turns on one side, and a turn on the other, and the turn should be wider or narrower according to the thickness of the rays and larger one should be small.
And the bag in which the medicines of animal or sheep's wool are placed should be large and its handle should be a palm-sized; and the end of the tube should be wrapped around the handle.
And it should be pierced with sharp turns as it is made to revolve; and if the space between the turns is wide, then the thickness of the tube.
And so insert it into the sharp turns with a strong thread of oil, and the thread should be of the quality which you fill the bag with medicine, that it is scalded according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too long or too short.
And then the patient is placed on his back, and his legs are raised up, and a sheet is placed under them, and the minister takes the bag and squeezes it with two hands and expresses it into the budel with all vigour until all of the water which is in the cutting comes out; and then remove the cutting and take away the patient.
And if the medicine forces it to sleep, then take as much as it can; and if it sleeps for a long time, then it should be followed with a wakefulness in the morning.
And if you cut it with salt water and sleep it, then repeat the cure until it is healed.
And if in the buttock there are painful hemorrhoids or blisters, then use a cutting with a sharp edge and a small one, since the children are judged by those.
Of treatment of wounds.
You have said and I will describe the division of treatment of wounds which is suitable for free ones, and I will describe it as follows:
Thus I say that the wounds are different according to where they are made and according to the place where they occur.
And the causes for which the wounds occur are as follows: by a fall from a height, or an incision of a knife, or a cut with a lance, or an axe, or an arrow, or similar to those which are the causes of the wounds.
May the plagues that are in the places of the body also be with these plagues which come over the head, or collarbone, or foot, or belly, or back, and similar to those of the members.
And I recommend the cure of some plagues so that this reasoning and disorder about other plagues stops.
And I will begin with the plagues of the head, since the recollection of the components will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Then say that when it happens in the head simple plague and is not a fracture, consider: if it is by consumption of food or by similarity, and has already trinquada the knuckle so only and is a great plague and you are afraid about this patient having an apoplexy, then you get up and bleed the head quickly, and do not delay; and extracts according to the amount of the virtue of him if there is no more reason to bleed, greater if the disease that has come out from the plague is little.
And be the bloodletting of the opposite of the infected part; and keep the patient from repletive things, and from strong drinks.
May if there is a prohibition of any cause, then it is diminished by the food and do not approach meat or wine.
And pause on the plague, if it happens to him apoplexy in oil rosy only or in wine in which is stipticated.
May if it is sure of apoplexy in oil, then pause on the plague, if it is new why he has third and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply lightly.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause on the back in oil until it is healed.
May if the plague is great or is by incision of knife and by similarity, and their lips are not closed by pustules, then adjust them with surgery according to what I recommend about the suture of them.
May if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and it is not retaining it but only a small stopper, then cut it off and cure the plague with medicines and restore the meat to its place of knuckle, and order to the patient that he eats drinks in which it is grossness: capons e formens coyts and similar to them, within that it is compost.
And if there is putrefaction in the knuckle and does not adhere to the bone, then you cut all of it off and flush it with water, and cure it.
May if these plagues are an artery or vein from which a flow of blood may come out, and is not extinguished by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if there is any non-extinguishment, then you cut it with a scalpel, or pierce it; and if necessity causes that what we have said does not respond, then you cauterize it within that the disease be extinguished.
And if these plagues are simple and small, the cause of them is ignorance; and if you sprinkle on them this powder, since solidified before that the air changes those.
And the way of the powder is this: take an oil of a split part, two splits of dragon's blood, three splits of non-extinguished matter; all mixed together and shaken, and if the plague is filled with it, and constrained by good contraction within that it does not adhere to it, and coagulated with the third.
And you tighten that on top of it with powder and let it sit there, and do not remove it while it is like this that it does not apoplexy, since it has not received the medicine within that it is healed.
And any time you make water only with caution, when it is not at your place in present oil and dragon's blood.
And this operation in the great plagues when you consider that it is necessary to pause on them and be straightened, and are only plagues recently of their third part, whose air has not changed those.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then do not put this powder on their position, but instead, cure those with water that we have said, perhaps you pause on their legs covered with a kind of oil which does not adhere to them, or you pause on their wrists with flour of bread soaked in water within that it creates a kind of poultice; and cure those with the other cure within that they are healed.
May if it happens to you on a fracture plague in bone, and it is small, then you extract water with gestures.
And I will direct the cure of fractures in the head in poison.
Of the neck plagues.
May if it happens to you on a neck plague, then it is not in its difference of medicine, and between the head plague when it is simple.
May if the nerves of the neck are incised or arterial, then they are not in their difference of medicine but are avoided with water that does violent stypticism, perhaps with vinegar and similar to them because it is hot on the nerves and contraction there. And you do not pause on the plague for any reason of all break, since the substance of the nerves is broken and the continuation of it is at the neck, which is the pus of all members.
And if water with the medicine is used, perhaps with an infusion of rose water or not-rose water, and wash it when it is washed with double water and the other roots are poured as follows, and wet them.
May if the plague is great, then administer surgery, or cut the lips of it, and cure it with powder within that it is healed.
May if the plague is deep or happens to it at the pus that has been softened, then pierce it in its most depressed place.
May if the plague has already been incised into an artery and there is a flow of blood coming out, then you separate or dry it up, or pierce it, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to water.
May if the bones of the jaw have already been incised and all the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the knuckle with surgery on the hair of it and do not touch that; before equalizing that and reducing it to its natural shape, and let it sit for a few days; and cure it with water in which stypticism and excitement have been added within that it is healed.
May if the plague has already begun to decay in bone, then beat that, and if there are fragments of it, extract all that you can; and if water is not fitted, let it sit within that the plague decays, and separate it and the relief from it is made.
And if the plague is new then sprinkle on it the powder which I have recommended to you. May if the plague has been fated as a fistula, then cure it with water in which the recollection will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
If it is a stab with a sword or a cut, and its depth, then consider if the patient faints; then you will know that the plague is deadly.
And if it is not deep and the plague is new why he has third, then you pause in it the powder for the first time, and do not tighten it so that the plague does not adhere to the patient in the depth of it and returns to its heart, and let it sit a few days; and free those two times each day.
And if the needle is not at your hand, then place it in the opening of the pouch where water collects so that it sucks out moisture; and have the patient sleep on the pouch so that water runs out into him.
Or if three days or more have passed since the poultice has been applied to the patient and no spasms or tremors occur in his body or constriction of his bowels, and at times other good conditions are present in him, then know that the poultice is effective; and then treat it with cold water and internal medicine until he is cured.
Or if the patient's recovery is delayed and the wound has been open for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; treat it therefore with the root.
Or if the poultice is due to a cut or knife wound, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat it with water that has been preceded by suturing, if it is deep, or with powder, if it is shallow.
Or if it has already been eaten into the bone, and there are only a few pieces left in the wound, then twist the poultice and draw out those pieces with a hook, if they are separate. Or if they are not separate, then leave them in place, as it is easier to remove the poultice than to extract the pieces from within.
And of other accidental poultices on the other members, the cure is the same as that which has been said for this one.
Of poultices for the womb.
The discomfort that occurs in the womb is great, slight, or intermittent.
A small obstruction is difficult to treat in any way, and if you do not remove the cause of their obstruction from its place soon, for it will become more difficult, because it becomes thick and difficult because of the instrument's involvement.
The middle obstruction is the best to deal with, because in this case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult; on the other hand, if it were a small or great obstruction, it would be more difficult to treat, as has been said above.
And know that a suture of the womb is second only to four ways; two sutures are common to all other wounds of the body.
And two more proper sutures communicate with the rest of the poultices; however, they are only proper for the wound of the womb.
I also recommend to you each exposure and description.
Then say that when the poultice is small and there is no cause of the intestine to be removed from it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the obstruction as we have said, or because the intestine is inflated towards the bowels by the cold air.
And so, when water is like this, then know that you should cut it off, rather than to immerse a sponge or a damp cloth in warm water, or to take water from the sea, and hyssop, and spearmint, and immerse it into the intestine, so that the inflammation is resolved.
Some of these water are also effective in resolving the inflammation, and it is better to use these than warm water alone for this purpose.
And then know that if you see the inflammation is resolved, then immerse the intestine into water in which it was laid up and dried, because by water it is relieved for a few causes.
Or if the intestine cannot be cured with this treatment, then cut off the obstruction with a small instrument where the hemorrhoids are inserted.
The first cure is the best, because it is proper that there be no section, and no occupation of drying it out unless necessary and depleting.
As for the instrument, consider its shape:
The one side of the instrument is acute, and the other is not acute, and the end is delicate; it should not be at the end of a spikelet, because it would be obtuse, and slightly blunt.
And if the poultice is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, then know that the reduction of it should be according to its natural shape in its place; if possible on top of it, because the best is:
Or if the obstruction is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head of the patient higher than the feet.
And apparently, if the obstruction is in either of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your attention and consideration at all times so that the part where the poultice is may be higher than the other.
And then know how to administer water in the large and small poultices.
In small poultices, prepare water as you see fit; and place the instrument between your fingers, which has the whole obstruction under it and adjusts the edges of it; and uncover that part to where you see the suture, if there is any cause of the obstruction from its place.
And this is the common way of suturing: one in which you take the needle, or count the needle according to the quantity of the width of the poultice; and then leave the end of the obstruction on the ring finger, and tighten the needle, or another that you do not insert into the two extremities of the knot, both extremities of the line that is within the two extremities, so that it may penetrate that part; and you have added two extremities to the knot and made four orders.
And then leave the end of the stitch double-knotted, and then add two extremities together, and then add two sides to the knot, and then leave that part; and then take the thread back to where you want it, and then tie that thread tightly around the other; and then add the width of the thread to the end of the stitch; and then tie that thread as well; and do not cease to cut the thread if necessity dictates until you have completed the entire construction of the poultice.
And let the fine and delicate needles pass smoothly through the flesh, because the delicate needles pierce it easily; and the thick ones are difficult to wrap in a knot, so that by water they become fine and subtle and thick.
And know that the needle is not fixed to two extremities of the knot next to each other, so that the flesh is not easily pierced and the poultice does not fall apart before it is consolidated.
And do not make long stitches, lest the poultice be prevented from being consolidated.
And then cut off the ends of the stitches so that the patient does not feel them; and place the stitches between the expanded particles of all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave them where you know that the poultice is already consolidated.
And these ways of stitching with needles are most convenient in small poultices, because you need only one needle or two or three threads.
Or the second stitch is similar: and you treat it with four extremities, of the knot and two extremities of the line, in one thread, with a needle that is wrapped up in the thread, in subtility and thickness.
And when I place the needle into these four extremities, return the needle from that middle point where you start it, so that the thread pulls back up from its low point to the plica, so that the suture is a good and strong suture of cloth where the cloths are tight.
And put between each stitch the quantity of the thickness of this thread.
And this stitch will hold the men together.
And with this stitch I sewed the plica which was broken in a man in his belly, which had been struck by a knife, and it was the breaking of the main plica, two palms from its main side, and it was the rupture of the main member; and then I reduced that which had broken up the main part for 22 hours.
And the plica was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and I healed it; and then there were pus and it turned black, and its condition changed.
And the other members had not healed; and for a miracle it was cured, because I did not heal that with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment is not attracted or any medicine, but I applied a wet cloth twice a day and washed it with cold water until it was healed.
But I made two special stitches according to the description of the Parable.
And that you begin the stitch with the thread from the outside, and push the needle from the inside to the outside.
And so with the needle penetrating into the thread and in the length of all the body, leaving the end of the knot where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside to the outside at the other extreme part of the member.
And so when you have made that penetration, then you make another penetration twice in the extreme part of the member from the inside to the outside; and leave the end of the knot where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside to the outside at the other extreme part of the member.
And make your penetration with that which makes that penetration in the knot at the extreme part of the member which is in the inside until all that penetrates.
Then begin the stitch from that side, and pull the needle out at the extreme part which is in the inside of the member, and leave the thread with the knot; then bring the needle from the other side to the extreme part of the member; and take the needle out of that knot.
And make a cut here and there, and make another cut beside it, until you have cut all that which is in front according to this example.
And the whole of this method of stitch is that you sew with the stitches which are on the skin, cutting all that which is in front according to the example; and making a complete cut on the other side.
But the second species of stitch is its own name, and this is according to its speech and by its description; that you sew with the second thread on which you add all the width to the other side in a convenient way for nature; and apply the extreme part of one side to the extreme part of the other side, and so it is made according to what I have told you.
Then take the needle to the extreme part of your thread at your next side, and make that penetration from the inside in two parts of the member; and then return the needle and make that penetration from the outside in two parts of the member.
Then return those covers, and make that penetration from the inside of one part to the outside in another two parts of the member; and then return those covers, and make that penetration from the outside of one part to the inside in two other parts of the member which are on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common stitch; and it is a stitch from which I have recalled the description.
This is the speech of Guilia
And they call it a stitch of the belly which is made with two needles; so you insert it in these two threads, and begin to make the penetration with the needle which comes from outside, and make that penetration in the other side according to the stitch of those which I have described; and so it is sewed.
You should know that when there is a rupture in the middle part of the belly, then the stitch of this place is more difficult than that of the other parts of the belly.
And the judgment of medicine for the plague is according to the other judgments.
And the cause is that when you achieve the recent plague before it changes the air which affects that, and reduce the budel and sew it up; then put a powder on it.
If the air has already changed the plague, then put on it powder which is in your possession until it changes its color and the threads are firm; so that they are consolidated in the middle part; and so heal it as you cure the other plagues, until it is healed.
But if you do not have medicines, then put on it for a few days, because it starts to burn, and change the cloth twice a day; and so heal it as you teach it, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in these circumstances when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the common plague will spread to the main members, then dip wool in wet oil of quality, or in rose water; and put it on the skin which is between the folds and leave it there.
And if you feel pain or rot in the belly; because it is a sign that something is wrong there, then rub on it with black tar; and more so if the decay has reached the belly and has caused an opening inside it.
You should know that the one who is thick in the belly is of a little healing; and that which is in thin bellies has more rot.
And it is difficult to heal because the belly which is called “gegunu” does not receive any healing of the plague which comes into it from all sides; and that is due to the great number of veins which are in it, and its size, which is small in those members, and its proximity to nature of nerves.
But if the cloth which you are using is infected with the plague, and you achieve it recently, then reduce it according to your description with which you reduce the bellies in the middle part.
But if it is passed to that space and it has turned white or black, then you string up that thread on the area which is broken; so that blood flows from that place, because in that cloth are veins and arteries.
Then you will cut it off again; and place two ends of the thread hanging down from the side of the space where the plague comes out, so that there is no attraction for it; because in that cloth are veins which come out and produce a bad smell of the plague.
Remembering the plagues when they happened in the belly.
When a disruption happens in the belly and it is small, then it is possible that it will be restored in some men; because I have seen one who was struck by a lance in his belly from within; and that was the main plague of the right side of the belly, and the plague was old and had caused an opening; and it went out from it and produced a bad smell and heat.
Then, if I understood correctly, I continued with the treatment even though it was not yet completely healed because its essence is to sublimate that which heals and consolidates the place.
And I placed the patient on their back in such a position that the injury was raised above his navel; and I did not allow food or drink to enter by mouth, nor did I allow them to go out or exercise themselves by moving or drinking water; and I kept between them and the injury.
And some experienced people have said that when they cut into the hernia and it is small, then cover it in this way: you take two knots; and you adjust the two lips of the hernia and place one knot over those; so, when you put them on and tighten them with your hand, you cut off the top of him because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another knot next to the first one, and do not stop making knots according to the amount of hernia that is there.
Then cut off that knot and sew the hernia; and if there is any remnant of the hernia left, then wrap it up so that the hernia is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient at all.
And it is possible that the hernia is caused by a thin thread that comes out of the hernia's base from the animal, because it is like a sharp needle; and it is that you take the end of these hernia threads, and if one is very thin, and you wrap the end of it with a thread, and you insert that thread into needles and sew it up with it; and then reduce it to healing.
This method of sewing with knots is only another way, a different way, of trust and hope.
But if the hernia is large and wide, mainly because it is in a thin hernia; because then there is only one way to sublimate, not to heal completely.
Of treatment for gout and fistula.
Do you know that any injury or abscess that is covered and gets older, and becomes a wound, not consolidated, always walks with its arm outstretched, and does not heal; then it is called a fistula in all members, and we call it gout.
And a fistula, according to its truth, is a deep, hard, white wound that does not hurt, and which is hollow; and therefore it is called "the pain of the fistula", that is, the ache.
And it is in men who are moist, which walks with its arm outstretched; and the moisture is absorbed in a few hours. Some of this moisture is evaporated, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
These are all the causes that I have mentioned, and they are explained in detail, as well as how to treat them through medicine in the division of flesh.
And so I told you about the treatment of a fistula, which is done by surgery with the hand.
Do you know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because some of them reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the cipha (spinal cord), or the bowel, or any of the sides of the ribs, or one of the joints composed of two bones joined together by cartilage; and they are similar to those that affect the main members and their neighbors.
And therefore those fistulas that occur in this way are of difficult healing; they do not respond to treatment or work, and ignorance is their consequence.
If any of these fistulas is too deep to reach those places that are mentioned, and you wait and trust in the healing; and if you want to gain knowledge of them, then try to stretch or cut it, and if the fistula follows a course through surgery, and you examine it carefully.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin needle, because a needle that rises and falls in weight is suitable for bending the twists of the fistula.
And if the fistula has become hard, it is not in your power to do any signs on it with a needle.
Then clean the opening with a strong solution, because the moisture that you use to clean it will also go through the other openings and run off.
And then ask carefully, according to which method you can recognize if there are any bones or nerves; and this fistula is distant or close to the surface, or it is a fistula with only one opening and it is over the whole body, from top to bottom; and if you want to examine it thoroughly, then remove it completely, taking care not to hurt yourself.
And when you have considered all these causes at the same time, then proceed with confidence to the treatment: and it is that you consider whether this fistula appears close to the surface of the flesh, or far from the joints; or if it is next to nerves, arteries, or veins; or any of the parts mentioned before.
Then clean the fistula according to what I have told you about its treatment; and let that water flow through it, and from the flesh, and into the openings of the flesh; and let it be cured that which needs to be healed.
But if the fistula is very deep, and follows a course, then cut it as much as you can; and remove all of its corrupted flesh; and insert sharp instruments wrapped in strong medicine; and put those into the hollow of the fistula, which you have cut open.
Then pour that medicine into the opening of the fistula, so that it corrupts all that is inside because of its sharp nature.
And then restore that with what you have to make healthy flesh grow within the fistula, which needs to be healed.
But if it is not healed by water, then you must cauterize it according to what we have described.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone; and you must investigate it and clean it according to what we have described; and if you do not stop it from affecting any vein, nerve, or main member, as we have mentioned before.
But if the bone is discovered in your presence and it is dark and corroded; then cut off that piece of bone that is corrupted; and then heal that with water, which needs to be cured.
And if it is not healed and walks with its arm outstretched, as it does when it is completely cured; then you know that you have not achieved the full eradication of corruption; and then examine it carefully and precisely again; and then restore that which has been damaged by the last strong force, and thus heal it.
And if it is cured, then good; but if not, know that corruption lies far within the body, which cannot be reached, and so you have only to remove that.
And if the bone is corrupted, then it is small, or it is possible for you to reach that, then do so with fine tweezers, which need to be directed towards water.
And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause to your strength.
But if you have any cause of the moisture, and in their incision there is no fear or mistake, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to open the bones of your body, then pause over the water that can be reached, and leave that water within which is the flesh and ligaments, and keep the water from being hardened, and the section that you have made in your operation shall be forced.
And so, if you fear, then pause over the trissat-oiled bed, or the Egyptian oil bed, or one of the green oils, because when those ligaments are being poured, and the bones are separated from them, and that attraction is being removed.
But if it is a large bone, then such as of the back or of the hips or similar to those, and that water which is corrupted is only on the surface of it, then carefully cut off that blackness and corruption, and restore the water.
But if that water which is corrupted is a great mass, and corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to stop up that water, and to cut all within that place where corruption has come, and then heal that which has become hardened.
And I recommend to you that you give this water to a man in his space so that he pauses it for example and helps your operation.
A young man of around 30 years old, to whom pain occurs in his testicles, and the separations of those are on the matter within the body up to the testes, and that matter is pus with great pus, and he does not have an external cause.
And then he extended the time to that person because of the mistake of the doctors up to the moment when the pus became more serious, and it discharged its filthy matter, and his cure was postponed until the legs were swollen, and many holes were made in them which all bled and there was moisture from the body.
And then many doctors treated him for two years, but he did not improve in that place, because I was called.
And I saw the swelling of his legs and the flow of matter from those holes for a great length; and the man's body was completely swollen, and the color of it was yellowish.
And then I put my hand into one of those holes and touched the bone.
Then I looked closely at all the holes, and I found that they came from all parts of the back.
And then I hid myself and cut into one of those holes where I found a piece of bone broken, and I removed that corruption, and it was already dry and corrupted and discolored; and another part of the back had been broken in which a piece had penetrated into the pelvis.
And then I cleaned that water that I had discovered and prepared the bone that had been discovered.
I recognized that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had cut off and cleaned, and I had already removed it.
Then I paused the restoration of the water with solidifying medicine for a long time, and it did not become hardened.
Then I went back and discovered the bone again after the first discovery, and I continued to remove corruption from it.
I cleaned that water which appeared after that corruption, and then I made a hole to heal it and restore it, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered another space below it and did not stop cutting the small bone little by little and piercing the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I cut about a palm of it, and I extracted its marrow, and then I healed it with medicines, and it became hardened a little and was healed.
And there is no need for an operation on him and cutting his body except by the disposition of his freeness and his lack of tolerance and fear of death, because it occurs to him at all times due to excessive vomiting that causes fainting.
So he was healed entirely, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and his virtue returned to him; and he did not change his behavior, nor did it cause any discomfort while walking or any other cause.
But if it is an eminent bone in the place of the body that has been broken already, then you should know that you cut that second way: and that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the end of that eminent bone, and direct someone to extend that ligament; and pause that ligament with wool yarn that is fine from the first ligament; and then bring that ligament over the flesh that is next to the bone, and extend the end of it so that you can pull on the flesh of those parts, and you will discover the flesh over that place where you want to cut it so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
And he pauses firmly or table-like on the end of the bone, for when you make water it is not prohibited to cut the corrupted flesh.
And you should know that the sawing is on the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces the other lock.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, then you should know that one end continues to the other, and corruption is in its place or in another part; then you discover all the flesh; and then you pause firmly or table-like on it, and then you saw at the end of that first part where the corruption is until it continues with the locking of the other part.
And let the sawing be in accordance with the place of corruption a little, as I have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then you should know to cut that corrupted joint, and then saw the bone where it continues with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but in another cause.
And if the corruption is in the pectus of the chest or the neck, it is difficult; but you should know that if you ask about the corruption and how it appears to you, and you cut it, and then you form it as best as you can, and then correct it for you, when it does not cause any discomfort to the veins or nerves.
And you should know that the incisions and sawing of these bones depend on their places, and their preparation, and the thickness of them, and their subtlety and size and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare every type of operation with suitable instruments for that operation.
And you should know that this operation requires specific instruments of which you are ignorant; and if you have long study and understanding of the methods of this art, and witnesses of its failures, for then you will be familiar with them, all of which is required to do this operation.
And I'll tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that will be simple for you to use in your prohibition, which you will experience on other things. Form of cutting:
Other form of sawing:
Other large form of sawing:
Form of chiseling: The point of this chisel should be according to the shape of a star's claw head, and the points of it should be according to the shape of the points on an astragalus.
And you should only use them when the heads of the joints are corroded or the large mouth is wide open.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a wider razor:
Other form of sawing that is properly done: Let the blade be sharp and the edge of it made of iron, and the member of it a small dagger done properly. Form of it:
Form of razor that has a concave shape:
Other subtle form of razor:
Form of other razor with extreme curved end:
Form of small razor resembling a tentacle:
Other lesser form of incising:
Form of another incising that resembles a chisel, and the end of it is curved like a saw, and is displayed in the place of bones:
Form of sawing that corresponds to the shape of those that penetrate the bones:
And the end of it is triangular with an acute point.
It is made of Indian steel, and its appearance is similar to that of razors, incisors, and saws.
Of the extreme incising and the locking of the bones.
The extremities may be preserved or not, depending on the inherent cause or the extrinsic cause; if you treat that corruption with medicines and cure does not come about, or sometimes the corruption comes about without striking any cause, then incise that member within where the corruption occurs, so that the bad thing is removed by water from death or maliciousness which is a greater dispelling of the member.
And the sign of that person is that the member becomes black within where it has burned, or it is returned to its original state within that the corruption has not reached, or it has struck all the body; and therefore cauterize that member.
And in appearance, if the corruption is caused by some poisonous cause from a scorpion of the sea or a snake or a weasel, and similar.
And if the corruption or the percussion is in that end, then you incise that part and do not give space for the corruption to enter the whole body.
And if you hit that part, then you incise it from the edge of the fire, and do not give space for the corruption to enter where it reaches the fire of the arm.
And if that part is hit, then you incise the arm within where it joins in the joint.
And if that corruption and again goes around the joint, then death occurs for the patient; and in this case, a quantity of virtue is administered.
And in appearance, if corruption appears on that foot instead of the other foot, then you incise it within one of the feet.
And if it takes hold of the slope of the foot, then you incise all the foot. Or if it strikes the groin within, then you incise the groin where it joins.
And if corruption has already struck the groin, then let there be only dismissal, and let the patient die.
And the way of incising the member or sawing it is that you tighten the joint at the end where you want to incise, and strengthen another joint over the spot; and extend the ministry of a joint to the ends, and extend the other joint to them; and you separate the meat which is between two joints apart, and so it is incised or sawed.
It is better to pause the drape of meat from all parts in order that it does not touch the spot, and let the patient suffer a proper injury and an aposteme cauterize.
Or if you hit flux of blood when working, then you cauterize the spot properly, or sprinkle some powder on it to tighten it; and return to your medication as soon as possible.
And then bind the infected member with a strong joint, and cure that within which is healed.
And I recommend to you that you take care of a man in his own foot, this mety who has accidentally struck it with fire that was assembled by fire.
And that corruption first occurred in that foot's joint which extends to the whole foot.
And then that man prepared himself for this other man who brought the cure to that member with the speed of his own life which was taking him from pain and from the heat of his own fire, and he incised that foot within the joint, and fire healed it.
A long time ago, that corruption occurred in that man's foot while walking.
And then I went to him, and so I pierced that superfluity with water that was poured on his body from the medicine, in order to change the condition of his body; and that superfluity did not respond and began to go away from that foot where it started, and it went away from the whole body.
And he appealed to me to incise his body, and I did not wish to make water flow on that superfluity, and instead I wanted to incise his body properly from death, for the virtue of that patient was over death.
And then he left me, and he returned to his own land and came to me who prepared that man's body, and I incised all of it, and it was healed.
And I have not added to this narrative but that it may be an assistant over this patient, and that it may be understood in accordance with the meaning of which it is understood, and according to which it should be turned.
Of the quality of cure and the nature of clysters with medicines.
When the apoplexy occurs in some of the flesh and the space of the apoplexy is prolonged within where it connects to a bone, then it is cut and pierced, and it is removed from there, leaving that place as if it were a wound, and the skin that opens it is stretched slightly, and does not return to its original state; it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged where the corruption goes up to some member, then it is called a fistula and not zooken.
And the cure for that is to incise that sinus completely as it is rolled up, and more so when it is stretched and made thin with cloth, and you ensure that it does not stick to the spot by its corruption.
But if you hope that the sinus will adhere and that that corruption has not achieved its goal by means of successive infection, and in the sinus there is pus on the face, then you treat that with medicines.
And that is what you consider when it comes to the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm with which you can smell its odor, then you cauterize it with an Egyptian medicine consisting of olive oil and honey, and let them be adjusted in a vessel, and let them rest on fire so that the medicine boils and reaches the top part of the arm.
And now you take from him the water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey; and you clisterize him in this way: put a poultice on the wound, and leave the medicine there for two hours.
And now remove that with a poultice; and make water for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the shame restored.
And some are clisterized with ash water, when you cannot take this medicine: and because you take the ash from the vine, and put it on the water; and now stir it up, and clisterize him in this way, that you swear that the sinus will remain closed.
And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then clisterize him with honey and water, and mix it with three parts of zink; and clisterize him with honey and zink mixed: for the quality of honey is to cleanse and wash away; and wine binds the sinus, and more so when there is an excess of dryness and rigor.
And when you have made water a few times and are certain that the sinus is now opened, then clisterize him with water in which meat has been soaked.
And because you take a poultice of daphnic water and dissolve it with rosin oil and wine; or because you clisterize him with some medicines that I have already described in the treatise on poultices.
And if the orifices of the sinus are small, so that the catheter of the clisteric does not reach them, then you make them larger little by little, and put a few folded poultices of Egyptian ointment or of basil ointment on them to make them larger.
And if the orifices are wide, then you add some sutures to the lips, and leave the quantity in which the catheter is added by means of an incision.
And if the orifices from which blood flows are elevated above the edge of the sinus, then you cut them with a sharp knife in order that the blood may flow inside and not outside, for when the arm is constricted at the edge of the sinus, the flesh will be damaged where it has grown.
And if you cannot cut the sinus according to the shape of the bone, as it is possible to do, then you make an incision in the member so that blood may flow there, so that it does not remain constricted and cause pain; and do this in such a way as not to injure anything or to keep back any cause of pain.
And place there that which is over the sinus orifice; which you open in all hours, so that the blood does not keep flowing from it, and cause pain. And so that you know if the blood that flows from the arm is little or much, or whether it is good or bad.
And now consider the position of that sinus; if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is with a swelling.
And if the medicine you have prolonged in this way and see that the matter is adhering to the sinus orifice, then dislodge it on the third day; and when you remove the poultice, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus comes a subtle virus, then do not despair of the adhesion of the poultice, for the healing takes possession, because in some people it takes a long time for the flesh to heal and not in others; but with those men who have a quick healing of the flesh.
And if the sinus has been painful for more than three days, then you will know that it does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is caused by prolonged medicine, then adjust in drying the medicines; and if the medicines are wet in their substance or power, then make them dry with daphnic poultice when they are being adjusted; and if there is an excess of dryness and rigor.
And the last to be used, is that you take a poultice of daphnic water and dissolve it in rosin oil, and put it on the wound, and use it with that.
And it already seems as if there is no more pain, with daphnic poultice, honey when it is thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them together, and mix them with honey when they are hot, and put some on the wound, and use it with that.
And some apply the long herbal solution and cut up lilies of the sky (and there are lilies of the sky) and flour from erica and centaurea, and use them as they are or prepare them, grind them together and pass them through a sieve and sift them over the honey that I have mentioned; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, then you will know that corruption is in its beginning; and now do an incision with a knife, as high as it can be, so that the blood may flow away from the sine.
Of treatment of wounds with applied ointments and scraped nails and cutting fingers off and sectioning them.
Panarici is a swelling that does not allow the nail of the toe of the hand or foot to leave it, and it hurts in the others; and if it is prolonged with its treatment, then the prognosis is bad, or it is an ulcerous swelling, or it is corrupted, and it puts out a finger, and greatly hurts; and so it corrupts all of that, and greatly disfigures it.
And therefore, when you have the water that I have mentioned in the division and do not use your treatment, then cut off all the excess of the nail, and cauterize the wound with fire; for cauterization is helpful in this case.
And if the bone is healthy and the nail is good, and the additions of the nail have already broken into the flesh inside, and it begins to put out a pungent smell and to burn it, then stop pricking that part of the flesh with a sharp object, and push that flesh away from there; and place on it that which I have mentioned to cure it; and use it.
And if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then cut out that bone and push it away from there; for no time is ever cured when it has become corrupted.
And if the corruption and corruption enter into a finger, then you cut it with a knife according to what is most convenient for the memory of that part, and then cure it; and use it.
If in the finger there is a puncture or an attrition, and it hurts severely, then you should have just begun to inject the patient with water, and dry the finger with a spatum from above in a transverse cut across the joint; and be careful that the cut does not penetrate the flesh which is under the joint, for you would make the patient experience severe pain, and cause unnecessary birth of flesh in that place; and then cure that place with water which will relieve the pain.
May it be adjusted well, which is born in the flesh of some men, very lean is that flesh all over, and very lean so in the bones, or very lean is in the finger.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or the birth is in some nuts of those said. May it not be born in some nuts of the aforesaid, and may that which is born in the joints very lean be well;
And of those which are born fatty, the cut is light, and it is because you pierce that part with a sharp knife.
May it be difficult to cure him who is born in the root of the joint; and therefore be careful not to cut that part.
May it be born in some nuts of those said, then you should cut the flesh of him at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and immediately close it with one of those scissors; and then cure that part which is cut.
May the cure which happens to those said between them in the shape of a ring or by birth of man who is born within it, or by solidification of plague or by burning from fire, or by similar means, then you should dry that solidification within so that those said return to their natural form.
And then place between them a thin plate of lead within so that it is not solidified too much, and separate them or place a thin plate between them according to how it is consolidated.
And if in some of those said there is solidification on the palm, then you should dry that solidification according to how it is prepared, and join it to the shape of the member.
Of incisions of two kinds, then are varicose veins.
And those are varicose veins, and those veins are thick and full of superfluous melancholy fluid which comes from the legs of the body, and more so in the legs of travelers, laborers, and porters.
Then you should administer a strong purge of black cholera from time to time by strong vomiting, and then draw blood from the patient's basilic vein.
May the cure be by two methods: one is that it is cut and sucked out that black blood, and another method is that the vein is raised and all of it is drawn out.
The cutting of him is according to this method: Dip the leg into warm water from the beginning so that the black blood is dissolved, which comes from the leg's vein, and then raise the leg high from the end opposite to where it comes out of the vein, using a cloth, and then cut the vein at one point, or two, or three according to a broad incision, and then lift up that black blood with the foot's end opposite to where it comes out of the vein, and then towards the lower part, so that the quantity which you want is exhausted, and which can tolerate the virtue of the patient.
And then bind it up, and order him to abstain from the foods which engender black cholera.
Repeat the cure by infusion when the veins are filled with water and noticed by the patient.
May the elevation be according to this method: You who have cut the patient' leg, if there are knots in it, and then dip it into warm water so that it swells up and its veins are swollen, or exercise it hard by strong exercise, if bath is not present, so that the member is scraped.
And then cut off the codena in the right of the vein by incision in the long or in the back of it, or in the lower part of it, or cut off the top part of it according to which you can reach the vein.
And then open the codena with a sharp knife and extract the vein from all parts until it appears at the surface, and that is the appearance of it which sometimes changes to blackness.
And then you shall see that white cord which comes from the codena.
And then you should put down that part where it is lifted up and taken out of the codena, and suspend it by an ounce or two of lion's milk.
And then cut another incision near that one according to three lines, and then extract the codena from the beginning of the vein until it appears.
And then raise that one and cut it at the back of the last part according to which you can reach the vein, and then extract that one and raise it until it is exhausted by the second incision, and then extract that one from the first incision.
And then bring water from that part which is higher or lower than all the incisions, so that it is exhausted by all of them; and then cut that one.
And if you do not obey me to extract and raise it, then put in a sharp needle double and fasten that one, or turn it towards the end of the vein, and roll it up with your hand so that it is rolled all over; And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is cut, it will be difficult to raise that leg, and it may come about the patient' injury by that wound.
And when all of it has been brought out, then place that part where the plague is covered in water and oil which is red and not red, and cure that part which is to be cured.
And if the vitus has not been contracted to some part of it and is not according to what we said, then you should make a cut over that part where the tortuosity is and at the places where that part is wrapped up, and immediately suspend that one by a sharp knife within so that you can raise that part entirely.
And be careful that your incision should not touch the vein or that part which is to be cured, for you cannot easily raise that leg; and serve your prudence in that one.
Shape of the incision which is dried up by the vitus:
It is not sharp by that one like a hook or the extreme part so that it does not touch the vein; and its flexibility is great like lion's milk, for if it were subtle, you should cut the vein with its subtility; be careful about that extra-subtility when you have said.
Of extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in the lower parts as when it is born in the Arabic lands and in the dry and arid lands of little tenderness and where there is no grass or shade.
And very lean is generated in other parts of the body, except for the legs.
And the generation of that leg is from decay which remains between the codena and flesh, and from venom which enters into the body from snakes, worms, and scorpions, and from insects which are generated between the codena and meat.
And the sign of the coming of that leg is a violent inflammation of the vein; and then the part is irritated; and then the vein begins to flow from that place which seems like plant roots.
And then if he has opened the end of him, it is necessary that you wrap a piece of lead over that part from which comes out his pee, and let it hang from his back.
And so often as you see any cause to move him away from the outside, wrap this around him in lead and put it on him. And if it is prolonged, then you cut a hole in him and wrap the lead around it; and do not cut that which is outside until it is inside, because if you cut that, it will contract and get into the flesh, causing a bad blister and ulcer in the place and disease.
So that it is pulled out little by little, until it is completely taken out, so that nothing is left behind in his body and there is no reason for it to be moved from within his body.
And of this vein I have drawn in some men who are ten hands long and more, and now it has come to me that one of them is twenty-two palms long.
And if it is cut at the hour of his medication, then you push a sharp object into his stomach and pierce it from one side to the other, so that all the putrid matter is evacuated from it, and administer the putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure it with blistering.
And this vein sometimes gives a ramp, and more often when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and then comes out through several orifices, and is drawn from each orifice.
And so I have said about this that it is cured with what we have said in the division and at the price that is above.
Of the section on worms born under the skin and called bovine disease.
This disease is called in some countries the bovine disease because it sometimes appears in cattle and is a little worm that is born between the skin and flesh, which goes into all the body and falls out, and is seen on the surface of the skin as blisters break out, which then open and discharge pus.
And its generation is by the putrefaction of some fluids in this way that worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarians are born in the stomach.
And it is feared because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and comes out through the mouth, then it breaks open the mouth and destroys the teeth, and there are also seen motes.
And so when you want to cure him and remove him, do not do it unless you see his movement and appearance, and then hold him tightly with a strong grip and press hard on him, and then dry him up and take him out.
And if it is pressing into the flesh and you do not see it, then stop cauterizing over the place where it is hidden, and the most common cause is the corruption of him which we have said above.
But if you see him come out to the head near the mouth, then hold him tightly with a strong grip and dry him up, and take him out; and let the patient use medication that removes the bad fluids, and be careful not to eat anything that causes corruption.
Of the section on disease of cattle.
This disease is called in our country Nafir, and it is a painful illness that appears in some members, and then is exchanged from one member to another.
And I have already seen that second thing which I recommend to you. And she was called to a village as a female doctor and saw her arm swollen and discovered a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and it kept getting worse for an hour, and then it seemed to her that it was alive and moving from one place to another, like liquid silver moving.
Then he lay down in the pain of that place and stayed there for an hour.
And then it moved into the other arm.
And then I returned to him that I would turn over him all at once, because I had seen the exchange of him from one member to another, and was astonished by his movement and speed. And I have already seen that second thing which I recommend to you. However, I have not seen such movement and exchange of members before. I did not see this in the woman's arms.
And you did not think it was because of him, but because of the woman, for she is of an old age where the body becomes stiff and the veins are covered up, and in this way her movement appears to the sense as a wind moves.
And it is necessary that this appearance of movement does not occur in those who are delighted and have a soft body with veins that are easily opened.
And if you want to cure him and the patient feels pain, then do not appear to him as I have said above, then hold him tightly and dry him up on him until the movement is stopped, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see the woman's arms, then you cure him with the extraction of the body and with water that drives away movement, and with pills made of fermented wine and those that resemble garlic.
Of the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are different according to their points, and they are small, concave, solid, with three sides, tongue-shaped, and flat.
And of the neck is when the arrow enters the bone, and it goes through the skull, because it happens with violent speed, and dizziness, and pain in the mouth, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and vomiting of cholera, and strong pain is broken off the word, and it is destroyed by the place of the plague, which has a white appearance like pus, and it appears to be coming out of the flesh.
And so if you see those signs, then you abstain from curing and extracting the arrow, unless it is taken out.
But the arrow that enters into the chest is close to the left arm, and you feel that it has stuck in a hard place, and there is no sign of movement; and the movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and it comes out with the black plague, and it freezes the extremities, and it causes a ringing sound, and fainting; and so if you know that death is coming soon.
And of the signs when the arrow has struck the lungs is when there is a frothy appearance of the plague, and the vessels that are close to the neck are blistered, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes heavily and asks for air.
And if the arrow is shot in the veil that is on the foot, and the pain then appears near the small ribs, and it causes great intense pain and sighing, and does not calm down all the muscles of the limbs.
And if the arrow is shot in the stomach, then suddenly the sick person vomits some uneaten food.
And if the arrow is shot in the belly and gets stuck, there is a chance of breaking the membrane or intestine, or the hernia that it tears, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow is shot in the bladder and it comes out with urine, and causes some pain outside, and the intense pain on the patient's thigh, then know that it is fatal.
May the other members also be affected as it is with the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, back, and chest - along with their respective limbs - are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, nor is it a poisonous arrow.
And I recommend to you that I have seen the effect of these arrows, so that you understand by this for what purpose they are made.
The cause is this, for in a man an arrow is shot in the lacrimal of his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him from the other side, I cut off his ears, and it was healed, and nothing happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who shot it in his eye, cutting off his eyebrows, and the arrow was hidden, and only a small tip remained attached to his lid, it was a sharp arrow of the Turks, with a ferret point - not having ears.
And after that, the Jew did not have any accidents in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who fell on his jaw- it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one to which there are no ears; and then I cut off part of that arrow between two guides, and it had already sunk into his jaw; and then I carefully extracted that arrow, and healed the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who fell in his stomach, and I thought he would die of that arrow; and then, since it had been thirty days and it did not change its position or cause any other symptoms, I cut off the arrow and removed it, and he was healed, and nothing bad happened to him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had lodged in his chest, and the plague was established on him, and since it had been seven years, he pulled out the arrow from the bottom of the rib cage.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had lodged in her stomach, and the plague was established inside her, and it did not change its position or cause any harm to her natural abilities; the woman did not suffer any harm.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had lodged in his face, and the plague was established and split the arrow, not causing any harm or pain, but it looked similar to these.
And I extracted the arrow from the lord of the king who fell in his left nostril, and it had already fallen on the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called to heal him after three days of his injury.
And then I removed the arrow with a subtle touch; and then I felt that there was no sensation  - but at the right ear, then I heard that there was a sense of pressure from the end of the arrow.
And I applied the ointment to the place where it was stuck  - an antidote and digestive, telling me that the place would turn white so that I could see the spot of the arrow, to clean it out.
And nothing bad happened in that place where the arrow had stuck; and I continued to apply the ointment to it for several days, and the plague was established in the meantime; and on the fifth day he felt a sensation in his nose, as if the arrow were coming out, and it did come out at night while sleeping, and I heard that.
And then I applied to the plague a strong corrosive medicine for several days, until the third day, and then I tasted it, and I removed the tip of the arrow with my fingers, which was very sharp.
And then I adjusted the treatment of the plague with that medicine for several days, until it appeared to me visibly the tip of the arrow, and then I left it there for a while, and later on, over time, for four months.
And then the plague became worse and I had to enter it with scissors, and then I cut off that part of the arrow, as it was coming out in pieces, and then I extracted it; and then the plague stopped.
And a few doctors said that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the plague was established, and healed completely; and he did not suffer any harm in him because of it.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows from some animals, so that you understand this for what purpose they are made; because the methods and definitions of those things are not understood by me in writing or by speech.
And the craftsmen know a little about it by practice, and on what is present understand what is absent; and they have new operations and new instruments for discovering the foreign causes of things when they happen.
And therefore I say that arrows are not discharged from the limbs in which they are stuck, but only in two ways: either by attraction of the part where they are stuck; or by the opposite of the other way.
And that which is discharged by the place of departure is attracted, or it proceeds from a meat-like place and is shot and discharged outside.
And if you do not obey the hour in which it is shot, then know that you will have to wait for a few days until you find the meat that is around it, and that it is neither attracted nor discharged.
And seemingly if it is stuck in bone and you do not obey the hour in which it is shot, then leave that for a few days and return to it with attraction and moisture every day, and then it will be discharged.
And if you do not obey the hour in which it is shot, then know that you will have to wait for a few days before you cut through the entire bone with a sharp tool, and then extract it.
Now if the arrow has already entered the body and it is stuck in there because of its own weight, then you should ask the patient to pull the arrow out himself if he feels it. If he doesn't feel anything, then shoot the arrow out with a special instrument that suits the draw of the arrow.
And if you can' t reach it because of the constriction of the flesh and the length of the pronation, and there are no bones or nerves or veins, then you should go deeper into the wound so that it is expanded and the arrow can be extracted.
And if the arrow has gone into the ear, which is held in place by all the flesh around it, then you should free the meat that it is stuck in from all sides; and work on it from inside the cavity of the ear, since it is difficult to reach, until it comes out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use all your might with forceps at every turn until it makes the patient feel pain; and be very careful that the arrow doesn' t break and that its extraction is difficult for you.
And if you can' t reach the arrow with your own hand, then leave it for a few days until the wounds heal; and then try again to extract it. Now if you have a fever that causes a cold sweat, then administer the medicine we talked about in the first chapter.
And preserve your patience in case you need to extract the arrow from any blood vessel, nerve, or string; and administer medicine in all possible ways for this purpose - with ease, calmness, patience, and caution.
And therefore turn the arrow around so that the patient faces upwards, as it is more pleasant to extract the arrow in this way. Now if you can' t do it with your own hand, then administer medicine that allows for it with figures.
Now if the arrows go out in the opposite direction to that of their normal movement, or if they stick out a little from the body on one side, then cut off the tip of the arrow with scissors; and then fire the arrow, as it is taken out easily.
Now if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand according to the direction in which the arrow goes into the bone; and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for a few days, and then try again.
Now if the tip of the arrow is in there, then push it out with your hand.
Now if the tip is stuck, and you want to administer an impact, then push it in with your hand - if it's deaf - a special instrument so that it enters between the hollow of the arrow and pushes it out; and then push the arrow out with your hand.
Now if the arrow is hollow, then push it in with a strong instrument; as the arrow itself pushes against the area inside the body.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then cover all the flesh with medicine where it has entered; and then cure that area with medicine.
And if the arrow goes into the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the ribs, and it is close to a nerve, then cut off the tip of the arrow with your finger; and be careful not to cut any blood vessels or nerves, and then fire the arrow. And if you feel pain, then stop cutting; and cure that area until it heals.
The shape of the forceps for throwing arrows:
They have sharp points like the beaks of birds, made with scissors when they grab the arrow, so that it doesn' t slip away.
And of those special shapes are made: large, small, and medium ones; according to the size of the arrow and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the flesh around it.
like a ray, so that it extracts the arrow from within the arrow and impales it on the object.
From bloodletting by veins.
The veins from which blood is drawn for bloodletting are those that: 1), 2) and 3). are found in the head. are found in the head, and are known as: 1) the pulsatile veins that run through the ears, 2) the two veins that run along the temples, 3) the two tears that come from the eyes, 4) the vein that runs along the nose, 5) the two veins at the base of the throat, 6) the vein in the middle of the forehead, and 7) the two veins on the lips. These are known as the alchemical veins. Now the veins that are bloodletting from the arms are: 1), 2), 3), and 4). Because one of those veins is a cephalic vein, and it should be drawn from the head; and people call it "the vein of the head", and it is a venose vein, and another ram of the cephalic vein; and this ram is called "citillar", and people call that vein "the vein of the belly"; and the veins that run down the arms, and are paused over the fire, and which are being bled from - those are the ones that are named "venous veins", and those two veins run under the ears; and one of them is called "the little vein", and it runs between the cephalic and temporal veins; and another one of them runs along with the jaw; and it is known as "the vein of the neck".
And in the foot and leg there are three veins: 1) one of those is called  "the vein that runs under the heel of the wild head", and it runs on the outside of the leg; 2) another one is called  "the sophena", and its location is below the thigh's skin; 3) and the sciatic vein, and its location is between the thigh's muscles; and there are other veins that resemble those.
The healing of the veins that run through the ears is done by small, migrating, sanguineous, and scalded wounds on the head of old people with bad hair.
And the quality of the bloodletting is according to how it is done: if the head of the patient is shaved and the bloodletting area is well rubbed; then apply the bloodletting instrument in two places that are deeply buried on the back of the head, near the base of the skull; and then tie the blood vessels with a knot, until they stop bleeding; and then test the pulse of those veins with your finger, and if you feel it, then stop tying.
Then take the blade of a scythe, and it is this one that is sharp; and then push it into the vein from below, until the blood starts flowing out; and then apply force to that one with your hand until it reaches the bone. And then lift up your hand towards the vein and cavity above the hole, and cut the vein with a sharp instrument. And be the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers' breadth or more thereof; and make it as wide as you will.
Then put on your gloves and cut there that which is to be removed.
And already at the beginning of this book has been described the incision of those and their cauterization.
More than two veins, which are at the base of the legs, give life to the flux of blood from the foot; they are the ancient and evil disease of the eyes, frequent headaches, and acute effusions that spread in the limbs.
And the quality of the bloodletting depends on what you have decided: If the patient's leg hurts when it is pressed, and this pain is felt by touch, then the pulse should be tested for weakness; and afterwards, you will know whether to try or not.
Then raise the vessel at its roots from under the skin with your thumb; insert the bloodletting needle below, and lift up the vein in its place; cut it there according to what you have determined, and then let it flow from the cut.
Then cut the skin of the patient' leg, and leave it for an hour; then place your hand on the vein, and also your gloves, and tighten there with a firm grip, leaving it for a little while; then let go, and make the incision.
Then the memory of them is already presented, as well as their incision, and the cauterization at the beginning of this book.
And the healing power of bloodletting from the forehead vein is for the ancient diseases of the face, as well as for headaches, and also for bad smells from ulcers.
And the quality of the bloodletting depends on what you have decided; and if the patient' leg hurts when it is pressed, then bind it with a cloth so that the vein appears; and then put the instrument into it, which is called a scissor, and this is its form.
Then stop the piercing that is on the top of the scissor over that vein and hit it with a hammer or another cause in the same way as this, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; then cut through the skin of the patient' leg, and tighten there with a grip; then let go, and make an incision.
And some people say that bloodletting is a good thing, but it does not follow that the bloodletting should be of an extreme nature as with the others; for the bone is strong and firm, and would easily break if bloodletting were done from it when it is thin.
It may be done with two veins that are at the base of the eyelids, in order to relieve the pain of the eye; and this is good for headaches and eyesores.
And the quality of bloodletting is to tighten the leg with a cloth; and then let him be standing on the top of it.
And let blood be drawn according to the transverse direction at a little length, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is done finely, then the end of it will easily break.
Then let the blood flow as much as you need; and place your hand on those areas, and tighten there with a firm grip, and then cut them off.
And the bloodletting from the nose vein is for a severe fever and for a violent headache; and also for ancient diseases of the face, and emigrant diseases, and most importantly when they are old.
And the quality of bloodletting from the nose is to tighten the leg with a cloth; and then place the patient' left hand on it; and take up the needle with care in your right hand, and make a fine incision at a little length because the vein does not appear here, and because the blood starts to flow soon.
And at the end of your work, you will do small bloodletting little by little, and let the blood flow according to what is necessary; and then place a cloth on it, for that wound heals quickly.
It may be done with the two bloodletting instruments of constriction, from which it begins to be harmful; and this is good for starting leprosy, as well as for bad diseases and foul smells.
And the quality of bloodletting from those is to tighten each one by the leg with a thread; and place the patient on a table, and let the instrument be under his head; and let him lie on his back.
Then let blood be drawn with a long, large needle little by little; then draw out the blood according to the time or water, as much as you need; and then do the same for the other vein.
Then cut off the thread and tighten the two veins with a moderate grip because the patient might die if they choke; and leave them inside, for the plague is healed.
And the healing power of bloodletting from the veins is to relieve a small blister and pus on the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and cracks; and also to remove bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of bloodletting from those is that you cut the skin in front of your face, and tighten it with a cloth, and separate the lips of him; and look at the two veins which are on the right side of the lip, and the other which is on the left; and recognize each one according to its blackness, and this one is more because the two blood vessels are small black ones; then cut one with a sharp blade.
Then if you have any doubt, leave it; and if you do not know which one is which, then go to the incision of the larger one, and of the manifestation of pus from them.
Then make the incision of the two veins that are on the lips.
And from the two veins that are on the tongue, half an inch of bloodletting is enough for headaches, and for a pre-fever that is in the throat, and for ancient diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting from those is that you follow the tongue between your hands before the sun comes out; and raise the tongue of him, and look at the two veins on either side, and their color changes to blackness.
Then bloodlet one of them; and be careful that you do not draw the blood out of them too much, because those are arteries.
And your veins that are bloodletting in the neck are those from which blood is usually drawn in all people; and the bloodletting from them is done with two methods, or by inserting a needle with care or by cutting with a knife and applying it to the wound, if there is any, and this is its form.
And the third one is that it is done by opening the skin of the vein with care, and this is done to reveal large veins, and also those that contain thick blood; and these ones are removed in a different way than those.
And this type of bloodletting is of lesser duration and more subtle in its effect; it is suitable for bloodletting from small veins that contain mild black bile.
May the bloodletting of the bazilian vein be of three types: it removes the black bile that is found in the head and the heart; and from this it affects the feet and the belly.
And it is appropriate for the bloodletter, when he performs this type of bloodletting, to be very careful with it; because if he misses the artery, and if by mistake he pierces into it in the process of bloodletting, he will cause a flow of blood, so that it must not be done by piercing.
And if the bazilian is not seen clearly, then you must stop and move to the other; or search for a hair; or bloodletting at the end of the arm, since that is obvious; and dry it with a cloth after bloodletting without water.
May you choose the place of bloodletting on his arm, and stand before the bend of the arm that touches the place that you know about, and hold it firmly with a cloth; then cut off the arm and dry the vein for bloodletting without water as mentioned above; and be careful not to pierce into the artery by any margin.
And when you see it with strength hold the joint, then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and so let it go.
And if the blood flows from bloodletting as a child does, and that blood is dark, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; and then place your hand on it for a long time; and then remove your hand when the blood has stopped flowing; otherwise hold the arm firmly and let it go.
And pay attention to the patient's diet, and be careful with him for a few days until he recovers.
May the blood not stop flowing if it does flow; and if you have no medicine with water, then you pierce the artery with a sharp object, if seen; because the end of it is contracted, and the blood stops flowing; or that you take a piece of fig, and cut it into pieces, and one piece and hold it over the place of the vein's constriction against the joint, and put another on top of it within the next day.
And if the blood has stopped flowing, then it is fine; and if not, then treat him with water that comes before remembering the place where the dust stops flowing due to blood flow.
And stopping the flow of blood is difficult because of the small place of the joint and the possibility of hurting the arm.
May the bloodletting from the black vein be a treatment that removes the blood of the cerebral part and of the part of the body as mentioned above.
And if the bloodletter is careful in the process of bloodletting, because he has missed a nerve; and if by mistake he pierces into the place of bloodletting without water and cuts the nerve, it will cause stupor to him, and his recovery will be difficult, and if he does not recover completely, he will remain disabled. And that nerve is obvious with regard to feeling; and if it is hidden from sight in some men and is subtle, then you must stop bloodletting at the place where you have cut it while holding it firmly, and avoid hitting the nerve with your hand.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in length.
May the bloodletting of the cephalic vein be that it removes the blood of the head and keeps away the black bile from the body.
And in this particular case, if you want to bloodlet by piercing with the olive bloodletting or the mirty bloodletting; for it is the safest of all veins because it does not contain an artery or a nerve.
However, this severe swelling is found in some people when they are bloodletting for the first time; and it does not show itself on that person's body until the second stroke of bloodletting.
The first of it is that you know that bloodletting should not be administered unless in the conservation of health and with the hope of preventing the coming of black bile, and that it should be done on one of those veins: cephalic, falciform, or bazilian; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, when there are signs of reabsorption.
And let bloodletting be done on the third day or the first after three hours have passed from the previous day.
May bloodletting be administered if it causes convenience and necessity to the patient, or at a new time or day, in any hour and at any time.
And it is appropriate that the patient not be bloodletting until he or she has reached the age of twelve years, and that women are not bloodletting if they have passed the age of seventy, and that those who are already elderly do not bloodlet.
And if anyone wants to bloodlet in a particular way, then he must make sure that his bowels are clean before bloodletting by the clister lion; so that the veins do not take away the excess in the bloodletting of the bowels, which is useless, and does not harm the main members.
And do not bloodlet on patients with nausea and thirst due to the loss of fluids; or because they are tired or have a headache, or because they are ill from too much food, or because they have not eaten for long; or because their bodies are weak or made of flesh; or because they have animals with them; or because they are sleeping.
And it is appropriate to consider the subtle humors in front of him if his blood is thick; with respect to diet and drink, and with respect to medicines if it can reach him.
And enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise in any way so that the blood is subtle.
And pause bloodletting on his feet at noon, for this time is called third hour; and that is the time when you are supposed to stop bloodletting as mentioned above.
And be sure that the foot of the patient is protected on that day from all bad animal accidents, and from anger, fear, and from all physical accidents, and from unnecessary work and eating, and resembling their appearance.
And at the same time, make sure that the causes of bad smells and odours, and balms, and resembling things according to their amount are present.
And follow the bloodletter with a cloth that is softer than the cloth of the patient' body who needs to be bloodletting.
And then take his arm, and rub it with the bloodletter twice or three times; and then tighten the joint with a rope and wrap it up twice.
E sia the stricture temperata, quar the stricture quant no es engual, o la stricture es am superfluitat, lahoras proibys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras proibys le cors del sanc eximent.
Then apply the application, covering where it should be applied, so that the veins are swollen and pronounced in feeling.
Then the flubotoman will cover where it should be applied with a little bit of oil that is especially made for this; and he will place his right hand on that vein from which the fluobtomation should come out, leaving the spot from which the fluobtomation comes out so that the vein is slightly released, and the percussion stops because from those veins is where it is most full of pulsations and when you stop the flubotomator from applying pressure to that vein, it should be discovered; and if it does not come out, then the flubotomator must apply more pressure, and this will cause the vein to contract.
And therefore, for all of these reasons, when the flubotoman stops and is stimulated in all of these causes.
Then stop the fluobtomation, maybe if the vein is caught in a fold, do so right away; and if not, then repeat this somewhere else, leaving that spot a little bit, or above the shinbone, if the spot is not painful.
And if the spot is painful or the patient has a hernia, then leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature because it will cause more pain, nor get into the bath.
Then repeat the fluobtomation if the patient is in pain.
And if the pain is small and subtle, and you are afraid that the amount of pain will not be great enough, then repeat the fluobtomation on that spot a second time, and adjust in the opening slightly, and do so with a little pressure in front of the spot that is painful because that spot is painful in many people;
But if that spot has already been opened, then do not repeat on that spot again because it will not excuse your cause; and place your hand over that part of the foot where there is pain, because it eases the pain of the foot. And it is better in this spot than oil or any other oils.
And it seems that administered with oil in all the fluobtomations where you fleubotome the veins, because of the prohibition of the pain of the foot is caused by a constriction of the sanc, and they make water turn into soup when stopped from one of those spots on the spot, because the sanc has softened and turned around when it becomes thick.
And if, in the spot where the fluobtomation is made, a large apperition occurs because it happens in folds and most often to that which does not bleed but only that fold, or to the opening of the vein a little bit, then cut, and place your hand over the spot with sponge infused with water and salt, slightly burned, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
Then apply a little bit of water to the base of the foot from that vein with respect to it or another vein.
And if it remains in the spot for a few days some blackness or green, then do not apply this water; and if you want to, place on that spot some oil of aloes dissolved with myrrh, or oil of mint or calamus or the same smell.
And so, in order to avoid pain, apply this water when you have applied the base of the foot from that vein with respect to it or another vein.
And therefore place your hand on that spot and if you feel pain then stop applying pressure to that spot because it will cause the blood to flow from the sanc artery.
Then apply a paste with this water to tighten that spot so that it becomes hardened, and then treat the same spot with another treatment within which it is healed.
And therefore, depending on how much of this quality and what color prevails over the foot, treat each person differently.
Because if the sanc is black, then leave it alone until it heals, and if it becomes thick, then leave it alone until it softens, and if it is hot, then leave it alone until its acute nature cools down.
And if the person is hot and full of energy and needs sanc removal in a fold, then make the fluobtomation of the vein larger and the flubotomation be longer.
And in that person who is cool, make the opposite of what you have done for this person, and if the sanc needs to be extracted in multiple folds, then make the fluobtomation in those folds long.
And the best thing to administer in a vein fluobtomation is that it be made by cutting across, not puncturing.
And this way of applying fluobtomation saves the flow of sanc and the incision of nerves, and it is more laudable and better than fluobtomation according to its location and length.
And to the one who is accustomed to having fainting, the fluobtomation should be applied before a little bit of water infused with wine or simple syrup slightly burned; and extract the sanc in three folds or four.
And if it is a cold with fever, then dip before the fluobtomation infused with myrrh oil or with oil of honey flavored with spices such as cinnamon, ginger and cloves, or with other fragrant oils, or with perfumed oil and spices, or with scented oil.
And if fainting occurs due to fluobtomation, and it is a cause of pain from the foot, then dip in cold water with a little bit of meat broth and scented oil; and use spices like cinnamon, and tie the person's shoes tightly with that.
And use other causes we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And who wants to avoid breaking the person's arms and dissolving their sanc according to the second spot, then apply the fluobtomation for a mot reason, and its virtue is that it removes the sanc little by little, so it is done according to how much of this quality there is in consecutive days.
But who wants to avoid breaking the person's arms, and removing their sanc according to a third spot, and the person' s body is strong, then apply water after seven or nine hours from the first fluobtomation.
But who wants to get rid of the pain of the person's body at the opposite end of where it begins, then do so on the second or third day.
And that body in which there is a lot of pain and it is hot and acute, then remove the sanc from one spot and do so with a large amount of water, and tighten the person' s wrist over his heart, so that he does not die at the place where the fluobtomator is ignorant and careless.
And when you want to avoid breaking the arms and removing the sanc according to a second spot, and the orifices of the veins are already closed and it is difficult to extract the sanc by applying pressure with force, then press down on that spot slowly and gradually, because water is too harsh.
Then leave it alone for a little while before applying it again; or apply water to the acuteness of the fluobtomation that is coagulating the sanc in the vein orifice; or place water on it with a light pressure until the sanc comes out of its own accord.
And if the vein has burst, then let it be left alone and do not touch it until the bleeding has stopped.
And if necessity forces you to urinate secondarily, and there is no excuse, then let it be urinated on that place or in another arm on another vein.
And the vein called "brae's funnel" is severed in that place where it meets the bursa or the basilica, when they are not twisted or hidden, because it is made of those.
And the quality of the surgery is that the patient's hand goes into water until the finger becomes stiff and the vein appears clearly.
Then it should be strengthened with a string half-way on the joint, and then it should be severed according to the small cross, not longitudinallly or according to its length.
And be wide open and your surgery should be done at the joint of the hand a little bit.
And if there is a prohibition against the flow of urine, then you should immerse the hand in water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from immersing the hand in water, and the time of the month is paused when the urine flows into water in winter.
And the surgery of this vein is more safe than that of all the others, because there are no pulsatile veins or nerves.
And the surgery of the little finger on the right hand is done to the hernia in the belly.
And the quality of the surgery is that you tighten the hand with a rope or your own, because you have immersed it in water until the vein swells and is clearly visible; then you should sever it according to the cross, and if you cut it from all sides it will not be seen there.
And preserve that you do not cut off the hand after surgery, because there are nerves of those denuded muscles.
Then return the hand to water and let the urine flow in it, because if you do not immerse that hand in water, the urine will clot at the opening of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And when the urine is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you should pause over the vein with oil and salt so that it does not set firmly; and apparently you should cover yourself completely.
But if the surgery of the little finger on the left hand is done to the hernia in the belly.
Then do the same surgery for it as you did before for the other one.
And the type of surgery for the vein is done to the hernias that are in the side of the body, as they are also hernias of the mother, and with the retention of menstruation, and with the hernias of the ribs and the breasts, and their similarity to those hernias.
And the quality of the surgery is that the patient puts his hand in water until a vein appears clearly; and he places a strip on the joint of the hand; and the place of the vein should be clearly marked, and from there it should branch out into the face of the hand like branches.
Then sever it widely or cut off the top part of the arm because it is better and safer to do so.
And if you sever the vein on the face of the hand, then you should guard yourself from the nerves that run under it on the face of the hand; and do your surgery according to the cross, as if you were cutting it.
And be careful with the surgery.
But if there is a prohibition against the flow of urine, then you should immerse the hand in water until you achieve your need.
And if the person who performs the surgery makes a mistake in the first cut, then he repeats it again a little bit because the place is marked; and you do not fear that it will be bad, but you should guard yourself from the nerves there as well, for what we have said.
Then do the same for the other side in reverse.
And from the sciatic vein, the place there as we said is marked by removing the skin from the side of the hip.
And the surgery for the arm is done with pain when it is caused by the pain.
And the quality of the surgery is that the patient goes into a bath, and he speeds up and tightens his belt on the hip from the side with four holes in a long and thin piece of rope, because it does not appear otherwise except by water.
Then when it appears, then you should sever it with the second cut, which is on your side and according to the cross, and it is better; or you can cut it by cutting it or you can make a cut, because the place is marked.
And the vein is in a place where it is difficult to find; and if you feel the pulse of that vein, and it does not appear clearly, then sever any part of it, and that which appears on the two sides of the ear and the ring finger.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and let the urine flow in the quantity you want.
Then remove the constriction and place it over the site of the surgery with a tight hold, because it will heal easily.
Of windiness and of the qualities of using those.
Of windiness by means of corns, or of earwax, or of veal.
And windiness is caused by two methods: one is the cutting and extraction of urine, and the other is windiness by means of cutting.
And this windiness caused by cutting is according to two methods, because it is either made by fire or cut with it.
And the places from which windiness is administered by cutting and extracting urine are twelve parts of the body, of which one is in the back of the neck, and it is the last division of the head; and the middle part of the jaw on the left side; and the lower part of the tongue next to the mouth; and two spatulas; and the sides of the cheeks; and the two chins, and they are at the end of the chin; and two fires, and they are from the two arms; and two knots; and two muscles.
And windiness does not extract urine from the small veins in the flesh, and it does not stop the flow of urine until the whole body is emptied; but windiness is made by fire or cut with it, because it is a kind of hernias that are caused by a full bladder, and this is what makes the surgery possible, or it stops windiness by stopping the flow of urine.
But if necessity forces windiness by a hernia or continuously, then let it be urinated in the beginning of the meal and at its end, and in the middle part of it; and in half of the time.
And when, by some cause of those, and particularly if it is in the third or middle part of the month, then I command that ventilation be done before two or three hours have passed.
And the benefit of ventilation of the nape is that when it supports gravity on the head and goes down into the grooves; but more so that all the body be appropriately evacuated.
This ventilation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
It is not good that you use it with a grinding composition, or in which there is catarrh, because it causes great discomfort.
And by this it is not good that you use the old ones, and in the heads of which there are diseases of the gums.
But to that which is over that is continuing above it is done oblivion; and by this you command the ventilator that he pause his hand a little away from the ventilation at the openings of the thighs, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But ventilation of alkyhol is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the bazillion: and by this you confer to asthma, and to the contraction of air and to the splitting of the instrument of air, and to coughing, and to filling up.
And if the ventilation of alkyhol is a little closed, for if it is paused from the sides, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventilation of alchahidhan confers to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and emigration, and pre-fever, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the bazillion.
And if you command the ventilator that he not press his hand for sacrifice so that he does not cut the artery and cause flux of blood.
And ventilation of the sides confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and to appearance like those of the diseases that are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of another which is in the two lips.
But the ventilation that is done on the two spatulas confers to caphथन, which is done by filling up of quality.
And the ventilation of the two openings inside the mouths confers youth to phlebotomy of three veins, for it is of the bazillion, dark and cephalic; for that one attracts all those veins more than they are in the flesh, and these smaller veins from the other larger veins so that attraction comes to the three veins.
And command the ventilator that he does not process in sacrifice, for the place is naked of flesh, and leaves him so his nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventilation that is ventilated over alshоссes and confers to hemorrhoids of the buttock and to ulcers of the sides.
And if you command the ventilator that it is a great ventilation and that it is of fire, for the place does not deserve strong section; and strong pull with subtle ventilation without sacrifice so that it comes to sacrifice.
But small winds of the legs with great manifest pull, for they attract the blood of all the body, and confer to ancient pains of the teeth and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and confer to bothor and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and alhorcoben, and of two cavilles.
However it disfigure all the body and causes syncope in men.
And of the alhorcoben winds, the benefit is proportionate to the benefit of two wind instruments.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that you pause the ventilation at the beginning to see and run by water quickly, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but pause them slightly, and return them with care, and let the humors come to the place by arrival through a pipe. And it does not cease to repeat that and continue within so that you see the place become red and swell and that the rigor of the blood appears.
Then you sacrifice and repeat the slight water slightly, and consider in the disposition of the bodies.
For that man who is of tender flesh of meat, you scarify one time and do not add, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the ventilator to amplify the sacrifice and make it slightly larger, and bring the water with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then you sacrifice two times, for in the first sacrifice the way of subtleization of the blood and of the water comes to it. But in the second for the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the gross blood.
And if the blood is foul, then let there be sacrifice the third time so that it achieves the last one.
And finally, when we want to extract the small blood slightly or slightly, it is sufficient for us one sacrifice.
And if we want to extract from one blood, sacrifice with a great sacrifice; and if we know that the blood is thick, then you sacrifice with an abundant sacrifice.
And the term of sacrifice in which is the depth of the line only.
And if that of which the line is thick, hard, dark and the pores are narrow, then let the places of the vents be wet slightly, wide resolute; if it is in summer time, then such as it is oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of sweet amaryllis, or oil of camomile, or of honey; and if it is in wintertime, then olive oil, or oil of lark, or oil of chamomile, or of saffron, and to those resembling.
And if the superfluity is thick, it frays; then let the oil be bitter, or oil of myrrh, or oil of aloes, or oil of annethum, and to their resembling.
But if the ventilator has broad pores of tender flesh, then let it be prohibited from oil, and that in those places of the vents of its approach the ventilation be washed slightly with cold or fresh water, or with wine of Coja, or with Bordolagua water, and resembling those.
And if that of which the blood is of moist humidity, then wash your vents with honey or wine of Myrrh and sumach, and resembling those.
And if the superfluities are thick, then wash your vents with honey or wine of Antidote, or with water of Sansuc, which is marjoram, or of infusion of anethum, or of camomile, and to their resembling.
And that the ventilation be kept in advance of a bath; waiting that it is administered properly within an hour or two, and that it sleeps near the ventilation.
What is necessary so that the wind is governed by the phlebotomist before ventilation.
And consider in advance: then, if the ventilator or he who is to phlebotomy is coleric and blows on the head, so that it inflames it slightly, then take some cold water, or hot water, or milk of thistle, or wine of garlic, and similar;
And pause their meals slightly, such as porridge, and meats of little taste, and prepared meals with spice, and to them resembling.
And if the combination is fresh, then take in drinking sweet syrup, or syrup of hashish with spice, and sumac, and a little wine of ale; and that it be commanded that he uses slightness of drink and eating, and pause his meals of porridge and cannabis and pisons and petits and coles.
And when, on the day of venereation and of cauterization, the drink is greater than the food.
And when given to drink some times to certain men a medicine of musk, or of alcelite before venereation or before cauterization, or close by, so that the main members are comforted and the wound is softened; and do not take that wound.
May the cuts that are to be made be those that are stopped on the flesh, and over the wound and podagra, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and the cutting of the navel string; for these members do not suffer from being cut.
And do not desire that from those but an attraction of pain of a member, so then stop a wound on the flesh, and over the wound and podagra, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and cutting the navel string; and use that so that it is dissolved a sharp wind that rubs the member, and then stop over the belly and the navel, for that member becomes hardened and bleeds; because it resolves a wound.
And is stopped on the cheeks when it happens to their operation or pox, because by virtue of strong attraction light operation drives away the pox from its place.
And seems when stopped on the flesh and navel a wound resolves in those that are enclosed.
These winds are given only with juice, and some are given with fire.
And some wounds are given full of running water in the navels.
And that water is to fill the wound and be large, or is water in which herbs have been boiled; then use it.
Form of wound given with fire: its size is two fingers wide, depending on how we have formed it; and the quantity of the liquid is half a palm, and is in the center, the amount that enters into it a needle; and the hole is small according to the quantity that enters into it a needle.
Let be made of rose water or lemon, with large edges, lion, gooseberry and raspberry; so that it does not harm the member due to its position.
And is given, at the edge of the foot, a transverse piece of rose or iron, on which is stopped a candle by fire.
And this wind is much greater than that which we have described; and the small one of those, according to the navels and the state of the one who uses it.
And the winds of young people are different from the winds of old people and those of big bodies.
And the quality of stopping this wind with fire on the member is that he extends the ax to fire with wood properly in front of a small candle of wax, and stops it on the middle edge of the foot of the transverse piece of the axe in its middle place of the wound, so that the fire burns the whole body of the patient.
And then stop it on the member of the patient, and the thread on which we have spoken, unless when we have the wounds, do not want to stop that thread, but let the vapor run over that thread; then the wound is resolved as if dissolved.
And light the fire according to its way, and repeat it if you do not want that fire.
May a wound that is given in the navel of the patient, with water, not having a transverse piece or thread, and is not given except it be filled with water, and is stopped on the member only.
This is the form of it: And this wind, how much greater it is, so much better; because it receives a great quantity of water.
Chapter xcvii.
Sanguineous wounds are not given on motor members, but on the members on which it is not possible to place wind, because of their smallness, or because they do not have hair, or because they are in the form of a nose and look like them; or on naked member made of flesh, when the thread looks like them.
And the quality of using those that have been found if there are any sanguinous wounds that are in the clean waters of the world.
And let them be washed the day and night in two clean waters unless they are famished, and that does not harm any cause in the belly of those; and let the body be emptied at the beginning of cauterization and venereation, and let them be scrubbed on the member of the patient until it turns red; and then stop it.
And when they are filled up.
And if it is possible juice from the wound, it is much better.
Then, if not, wash the place with wine and then pour on water, and squeeze it out.
And if the wound is prolonged in the member, close it with a piece of flesh, and if there is a residue, then stop it with a bandage; so that it does not become infected.
And if the wound is multiplied, then dust on it three times a day, or apply to it, and seem like them of the stinging causes, unless the wound is cleaned; or stop it with the roots of the beans, and wash it, so that the beans stick to the wound, and the wound is cleaned.
And when necessary, a repetition of the wound, as often as possible change those who suck blood.
And if the sanguineous wounds are prohibited by suspension, then wash the place with fresh blood or put a needle in the places unless it stings; and then stop them, because those who feel any pain immediately stop them.
And when you want to make them fall, dust on those a little of dried aloe, or salt, or ash, and wash it often.
Thus begins the treatment of third-degree burns: by restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the treatment of fractures and accidental dislocations of the bones.
Oh, son, know that this chapter speaks of the foolish doctors and the vulgar ones and those who at no time looked at the free books of the Ancients or read a letter of them.
And for this reason it is necessary that the method of the scientists in our land is reserved; and I have not forgotten it in anything, but have studied their books in length and understood them, unless I drew out the science from them.
And then he began to experiment and study in my youth.
And I have already described this in this chapter all that concerns my science and upon which is based my experiment; for it has added to the length of my life, because it has released me from occupation with elongation; and has renewed life in me at the end of renewal; and has shown me in the end of declaration; and I have formed in it a variety of shapes of the instruments that are used in it, except by addition of declaration, as I have made it in two previous chapters.
Chapter first.
First chapter: Great and various are the causes of fractures of the bones; those on which the following preposition is necessary before we begin to remark on the members that are broken, and of different kinds. And therefore, let us say in the proem of this chapter the great principles of the speech; and the chapters that are to be understood by the artisan on the truth of those; so that you and those who are prompters to learn this noble art from you and others than can teach it.
And I say that when it happens to any fracture or dislocation or twist or impingement, then cover that you are cauterizing at the beginning with bloodletting or laying them down, or all together, if there is no cause to prohibit, so also with a healing of virtue, or it is that which has happened to him, or he is in decrepitude, or it is time for a violent heat, or a violent cold.
Then put him on his own food of herbs and meat of birds and crabapples; and forbid coarse meat and filling himself with food and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure that there is no pus in cauterization, and if you do not fear a flow of matter into the limb.
Then return the patient to his first position with him who usually takes care of him.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, then cover that the patient is being fed with nutritious foods of food and gross and heavy ones in which there is viscosity, so also with foods made from wheat cooked in water, and rice, and cabbages, and feet, and bellies of cows, and geese, and fresh milk, and large and similar to those, and this regime is made a coagulation of the fracture slightly and honey.
And you know that the bones break when they are in men who are in their first youth and in decrepitude, it is not possible that they are continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying up of the limbs of them.
But nature adjusts and amends on the broken bone from the very beginning any apparent cause of glut that adheres and strengthens that within which is consolidated and bound together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, so also with fire at the beginning, until there is no cause to prohibit it from its work.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's food, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and grossness, as we have said.
And you know that the varieties of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the spine is different from a fracture of the head; and a fracture of the foot is different from a fracture of the leg; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I remember with care of all the varieties of fracture, separated in his own chapter from the others.
Diversity of fracture in itself. And the varieties of fracture of the bone in itself are diverse; for it is made a curved fracture and another that happens in its stars; and some are made by the length of the bone: and they are the fractures of the skull and the temples and the additions, whether they proceed or do not proceed, also when it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and its fracture with a plague and disruption in the head, and its small fracture.
And all this variety is made by nature itself in the restoration of him according to what will come; let us remember it separately according to its places.
Diversity of fracture of the bone. And by this is recognized a fracture of the bone: it is tortuosity of it, and from it eminence and appearance of it to the sense, and not from it when you press that one with your hand.
And therefore, when it is not in the apparent place of tortuosity nor is it made by this, then do not do any touch to the patient when you agitate the bone, and if he does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
And while it is possible that it is tortuosity or a small fracture, then do not cover that you press that one with your hand and compress all of them together; and pause the medicines of which you have memory appropriately at that moment that conveys to the place; and make it straight by subtle strictness.
And you know that the place when it is curved and does not split into two or another that happens in his satagia, if it is re-made all at once from its own beginning, then begin from your own hour to correct it while you are making him a bloodletting cautery.
And if you are making him a bloodletting cautery, then leave that one for several days until the bloodletting ceases; and place it according to each way that you can of levitation and invention.
And you know that the restoration of him and the opening up of him is more painful than the fracture of the bone in which this happens to the satagia.
And place it according to what will come, when you remember him.
But if there are two satagies in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member of two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or at your hand if the member is small; or at two strings or at a string and at your hand.
And be your position at which you place the limb extended as it is according to its natural figure, while these parts are extended from the broken limb, then know that you must make a cut for returning those additions by invention and in each way that you can place them in their places.
And take care according to your strength that it does not happen to the patient by your operation or injury; and proceed according to your own power that you apply one bone to another in its company according to its best forms.
And place that one with your hand at that moment appropriately, and if there is any other cause, correct it and place it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And do violent extension and compression, as well as foolish movements that happen in the member when this is made, so also with a violent heat of the limb, as if it were a cause of bloodletting by its operation, or a cause of pain in the member when it has happened to him.
And the quality of the strictness of the limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and size and in the form of them.
And those that are small, as the arm and the foot, so also with a soft skin. And when it is warm, then do not cover that one with a heavy cloth.
And those that are large, as the shoulder or the back, then cover that one with a skin that is long and hard; for the skin that is soft connects the large member and strengthens it by its whole part with strictness, so that it does not enter into a spot of trouble.
And begin your operation with care on the patient, pause it carefully according to that one, and place it in its place of fracture with three coverings or four according to the limb, and strengthen your hand at all times.
Then bring him up to where he is most comfortable, and tighten him there so that his pain does not cause him discomfort. Then extend him a little more in the wrapping of the broken place, and soften the tightness little by little, until you get from the place a great extension.
And take another object and wrap that other cloth over the place three times in the wrapping, and bring the wraps to where he is most comfortable from the fracture; and your operation on the tightness of the wrapping and softening of that second one as we said in the first wrapping.
Then pause between the wraps of stopa lion or cloth so that the curvature of the fracture is engaged in it, if there is a curvature; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
Then pause on another object, and wrap those that are decently made so far, if there is no swelling or pus in the place, and then pause over that water which causes the pus and which contains the swelling; and leave it for a few days; and then tighten them well.
Then the sticks for most of the canes should be made of wood, and they should be formed with care; or of cane of palm trees; or of splints of palm; and be the length of each stick according to this shape and this figure:
However, let the stick that is placed on that fracture be a little thicker and further away from each other than the other sticks, and the length of the stick according to its size and thinness; and then tighten them with another object according to your first tightness; and then release it little by little according to what we have said about tightness, and let it be tight according to the place of the fracture, and the more it is away from the fracture, the less the tightness.
And let the wires be of moderate thickness and soft, and if they are thick, so much the better; but if they are too thick, so much the worse, for to cut the tightness equally is a great mistake when it is done by cutting with sharp-edged instruments.
And very thin wires are not convenient, for you will not be able to achieve the tightness with those wires; and it is not necessary that there be a distance of a thumb between one stick and another.
And if the patient is wrapped with those sticks near the place where you want to achieve the tightness, then pause for a moment so that he does not suffer any injury from that water.
Some broken fractures are caused by falling, and the cause of disruption in the cord, and I come to remember that in the cap when it is unusual.
And you should know that a broken limb does not tighten well with sticks on the first day; which is why, because the limb, when it is large, does not stop pain from coming when it is placed on sticks for three or seven or more days, according to your security about the arrival of pus.
And this is the way in which the ancient surgeons used to treat it, by placing them on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Way of wrapping like a damp cloth for the restoration of fracture, convenient to complex things and mostly to women and children, because it is that by which you take away the heat and friction: and this is that you take powder of flour, and that is the flour's mediastem in the movement of the mill on the parts of the mill.
And thus take him as he is, but rather take him from the egg of hen, and stop up the hole with plaster that does not spread or become thin; and use that one.
Another way of applying the poultice for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, aniseed, and marshallwort, which is called milgrane salvay, all in equal parts; from mirrra and aloe, five parts; alochole, two parts; and all are ground and mixed with water or milk until it becomes a paste. For this composition, because it is of good composition, restores broken bones lightly, and gives life to old men.
Another way of applying the poultice that you give life to fractures and twists: take marshallwort and met of white oak in equal parts; from mirra and aloe, a part; from acacia, six parts; and from white oak, twenty parts.
All are wrapped in three parts of mortar and crumbled, and they are crumbled with water or egg white and given to the patient.
Way of wrapping for the joints and bones that are separated from their places, and also for pains, fissures, and fractures: take woolen thread and immerse it in wine and olive oil, and then wrap it over the place.
Not useful for this wrapping to restore, from pus, and to expel pains itself.
Another way of wrapping that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; roll them all up together, and make a wrap of them.
The way of wrapping for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want to get rid of pus is made from razes of almond, from chamomile flowers and violets, from wheat flour, and all of them together. All are three times wrapped and given to the patient if the member is not scratched.
But if it is scratched, then take him by the hand, dip it in cold water or olive oil, and use it.
Another way to get rid of pus and a resolution that comes first, when it causes pus: take razes of almond and fennel seed, and horeamand and marjoram flowers, and all of them together; all are three times wrapped and given to the patient according to the quality of the member and rest for color.
But if you have a piece of wax in your hand that is placed on the broken limb, it will not restore it without oil, and do not add anything else to it; and consider whether it should be made thick or thin.
But if you place some salt on the broken limb, it will restore it without oil, and consider whether it is appropriate to do so according to the causes of drying that we have mentioned, such as mirra, honey, and other similar things.
Way of wrapping that you give to an injury and pain: take mugget, hazelnuts, almond slivers or goose feathers, and mint leaves, and all of them together; three times wrapped and crumbled, and then given to the patient.
But the amount is given according to the quantity of salt that causes a burning sensation in the wrap and then it is removed, consider whether it has happened because of pain or pus or if the bone is broken, then do not remove any part of the wrap for several days. And if there is a painful pain or pus or swelling at the place, then you will take out that wrap in the hour, and then apply salt to it.
And take cloth of linen and a sponge of the sea and dip that in wine and wash it, and then apply that water to the place until the pain and swelling cease, and then rest the member for an hour; then pause over the woolen cloth dipped in vinegar and olive oil or rosewater, and then reapply that to the place until you are sure of pus, and let it stop the swelling of the member, and calm its pain.
And then repeat the same constriction gently and carefully for your first contraction, and softly to that inside which needs to be healed.
And if times that the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all those accidents have already been remedied entirely, and you are tired of paste and constriction, then do so again with the same treatment as you did at the beginning.
And if nothing happens to the member from those causes that we have said, then do not wait more than three days or four or five or six; And some have left it for twenty days according to what you see with your own eyes from the slippage of the member, as we have said, until the fracture sticks together, and if it is placed on the clotting of the flesh over that.
Then adjust it more tightly than in your first contraction altogether, and adjust the thickness of the patient's food as it is preceded by the remembrance of him.
More if you see the place of the fracture has dried up and become thinner than it used to be, then know that nutrition is forbidden to reach it; and therefore immerse it in cold water every day until it is completely healed; and ease the constriction a little bit for this operation, and bring food to the member, and heal a little.
More if it is that the восстановители of the fracture of the member do not restore at the beginning, according to what it covers, and restore according to the tortuosity, it is an error according to its operation, and great fear, and if it is dried out, it will make the ancients grow larger in their free parts and endure with water.
And I have not seen one of them doing this, so it is more reasonable that it does not do it.
Capitol according to: Of a fracture when it happens on the head.
The types of fractures are different, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by a blow from a spear or other sharp object, and the blow breaks the bone completely inside the skin, leaving it exposed, so this type of fracture is called an ascial fracture; or the spear pierces a part of the bone, and it pierces the flesh and does not go deeper than the back of it; and this type of fracture is called an absolute elevation.
And the plague of these two types of fractures is great or small, and the fracture that is contracting or narrowing; and its cause is a blow with a spear or a hard object striking on the head, and they resemble each other.
And this fracture is penetrating, so it brings the skin closer to the bone; or it is on the face of the bone, and the plague of these two types of fractures is great or small.
And some fractures are healed in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and this type of fracture is called the capillary fracture.
And this is a fracture that is caused by a hard object or a blow from the side, and it enters some of the bone's parts, and it is made in the concave place, as if it happens to the tendons when they are struck by their blows and they break into the parts inside them.
And mainly it is made in the bones' bodies of human beings, as if they are caps of candles.
And thus all these types of fractures heal, and they are difficult to heal in the same way that you separate them. And I come with the remembrance of everything in its place.
I have learned all these types of fractures by detection of those and by investigation of their causes and the obstinate resistance of corrupt flesh that is over them.
And the capillary specialty is known by the hair that is found on the bone, and it is washed over, and it limits itself to it, because the fracture appears dark.
More in the treatment of fractures, from the beginning, consider the accidents of the patient, and if you see through the accidents that mean danger by clear sign over pain, as if vomiting from cholera, and its extension, and loss of reason, and fainting, and high fever, and the appearance of gas in their breath, and the smell of it, and similar things to those accidents in the major situations, it is not treated unless it is healed.
And if you do not hope for non-dangerous accidents, then begin the patient' treatment.
The reason is that if it has come to you, the plague has come at the beginning, and if it comes in the winter days, then know that you are studying the resistance of the bone before the thirteenth day according to all situations.
And if it is in the summer days, then know that you are waiting for the bone to heal before the seventh day, while knowing that the skin left behind the bone is rotten from the panicle, and that those accidents happen which we have said.
And if the fracture has already reached the skin covering the neck, and it is broken into pieces and narrowing, then know that you are breaking the broken piece in a small way, according to what I have said before.
And that you are breaking the head of the patient' plague, and discovering the bone according to custom and the way to do it as you can, according to the shape of the plague.
And if it happens to you, detect the bone, and let blood from a wound or poultice on it, then pause it with a cold poultice, and it is that you place the poultice in the bone's place, and in its absorption.
That should be according to one of two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you cut the bone with a sharp knife in a straight line, and this is the way of it: And then you administer another knife like it, slightly smaller than that one; and this is the way of it:
And then add more of the wider knife than the second one.
Then know that you have different kinds of knives, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are narrower than others, and they are sharp at the end of their sharpness, and they are made of iron or steel.
And use them according to their ease in striking the knife so that it does not make a sound, and let it be hit by the knife at the end of its stroke, and let it be hit in such a way that it does not make a sound on the bone.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you pierce in the bone's circuit before you administer knives to it, those which are called not deep.
And these are not called in such a way because they do not stop the term of the bone's test at water that is near it, because the knife has a rounded edge or a small circle on it, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the bone' thickness.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these knives, each suited to the thickness of each bone, except for the one in the neck, where the end is sharp, the length and brevity are according to the amount of thickness of this test.
And this is the shape of three types of knives: The quality of piercing in the bone's circuit is that you place the knife on the bone and turn it with a stick, so that you know that the bone has been pierced; and then move the knife to another location, and pause it that it is between all the thickness of the ray or wrap it around.
And insert the incisers where there is a break in each bone, and make a small wound that you can put over it so as to float, as we have said, until you remove the bone or your own hand, or some other instrument by which you will approach water, with the help of which you will use needles and forceps.
And be very careful that the inciser does not touch any part of the body.
And when you have gone around the bone, separate it from the body if it continues to move, and take it out, being careful not to touch it with any instrument that resembles an incisor, but rather use a sharp and fine needle, because it is more difficult to remove than the others.
And if there is a small piece of bone that is broken and loose, take it out with ease as you would with the tools; then clean the wound with lime and water.
And another way of doing the operation is by cutting off, far from pain, which is what Guilia and Lausa did with great skill; and this is how it goes: it is necessary that you begin to uncover the break in the bone where the fracture is more violent and visible, so that when you have uncovered that part and have paused, you will have reached the end of this incisor slowly and gently, which is the shape:
And the round break is sharp and does not touch any part, and the acute break is in two pieces of length, sometimes forward, so that the round break is fitted to the body, with its acute edge on the bone.
And hit it with the incisor on one edge of a small piece, so that you cut all the bone easily like this, and if there is any danger in this way, which no one knows, or if it is a deadly poison; certainly, and if it was sleeping.
If it should happen that there is a part of the body attached to the bone in some place, cut it with ease with this incisor, because it will be easily removed from the body, lest there be any danger or pain.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the body, and what is broken is on the surface of the bone, and there are small and sharp edges, then when you remove those edges with sharp needles, prepare a number of them of various sizes so that you can administer them in all possible ways; use the ones most convenient to you at each place, and the most appropriate for those who are suffering from pain.
And when you administer the needle with a broad point at the beginning of the procedure, use the sharpest one; and then continue using them in succession until you reach the end of giving the injection, using the sharpest ones first.
For any small hairline fractures or subtle breaks, administer care according to the course of treatment that you have decided upon.
This is why they do not agree on all points in that art. And he writes about these large fractures.
If the pannicle is rectangular when you cut off the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the amount of wound, and dip it in rose oil; place that over the orifice of the wound; and then take another piece of cloth, folded or triple, and dip it in vinegar and rose oil, and place that over the first cloth; and then administer the ointment in a thin layer as much as the wound requires.
Let the wound heal with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure that there will be no suppuration; and then clean it and administer medicines that are not necessary to dry it out, such as flour of erysipelas and powder of endives and dandelion, and similar things.
This is because you must spray these medicines on the wound as much as they are dry; and generally, administer all medicines in a thin liquid form so that they do not stick.
Keep in mind that your cure should be clean; and do not use something like a balm in which the wound becomes infected; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is applied to the pannicle of the skull, it corrupts it and harms it, and causes evil on the patient.
And you cause harm to the skull when it is removed from the body, more so when the cure for it is not completed; and if you consider this carefully, you will see that all of these things are dangerous in themselves.
If you do not cause harm from the medicine itself, but rather from the benefit of that medicine, then take a piece of honey and some rose oil; and put them in a cloth; and place that over the skull; and then heal it with the spices of treatment as much as it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the Restoration of the Nose When It is Broken
You know that the nose is not broken from two separate pieces of cartilage, or one of those small bones, because it has only bone; and there is no fracture, but rather a bump and some curvature and deformation.
But if one of the two pieces is broken, then you must push the small bone into its place inside the nose, and the other piece outside, so that the nose returns to its natural shape. Do it easily for yourself, and be careful not to harm the patient with your procedure on their nose.
If the fracture is in the upper most part of the nose, and it does not reach that bone, then make it equal to the end of the ridge where it is a little thin.
If the fracture is in two pieces, then you make the nose look like that.
Rest and do not do anything to the nose on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, by the seventh day, take a rest from work with regard to suppuration.
Then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces, and make it the width of the nose ridge by adding as much as it needs to fill that ridge.
And I say some of the old restoratives that the calve is wrapped in a bandage, and they are changed every day, but I have not seen it; provided that the calve is wrapped in album from beef suet mixed with powder; and then let it rest until the bone has hardened and the cartilage has been strengthened.
Some are wrapped in the nose, instead of calve, lest they be closed by a bandage wrapped too tightly around the nose; and that it is already broken from the most violent fracture, and that the patient may not be forbidden to breathe.
This is not necessary for you; and if you want to, make it one piece, and if you want to, make two pieces.
And if there is another suppuration, insert the nose with a cerat in vinegar and rose oil, or with a cotton-wool plug; or with diaquelone.
But if there is no suppuration, then you insert it outside with flour of erysipelas and powder of endives in beef suet; and then place it over the nose so that it does not stick to anything.
If the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then cut them apart and remove those with instruments that suit them; and then sew up the wound, treating that which is infected and solidifying it and applying plasters as necessary.
And if plague occurs inside the nose, then you must treat that with calamine and administer lead cathartics so that it is completely cured.
Chapter .iiii.
Restoring the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by plague, regard if it is out of place only slightly and is not bent or twisted inside, then its recovery will be easy.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should introduce the little finger of your left hand into the mouth of the patient; and likewise, if the fracture is on the left side, then insert the little finger of your right hand; and gently push the fracture out of place with the other hand, holding it in position with that of the injured side; do this carefully and skillfully.
And if the jaw fracture has separated into two pieces, then you must administer extension of two parts according to their position so that the alignment is possible.
And if there is a concussion of the teeth, then strengthen those which you hope will endure with gold, silver, or cedar; and place wax on the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it, and carefully place a single thread along its length; and place a weight on it according to whether it is suitable for binding and applying it, so that it is not destroyed.
And order the patient to rest and be calm, and provide him with sour drinks.
And if you suspect that the shape has been altered in some way, then you shall cover it and leave it for three days; and then correct what has been distorted with dust of mulberry, chalk, or flour of cypress, because you will have removed the wax from it, and place wool over the plaster.
And then, once it is settled and adjusted, leave it, that you do not disturb it until it has healed completely and strengthened the fracture; for if the fracture remains untreated for three weeks, it will be difficult to heal.
And if any other fever occurs, then administer calamine to it that has been seen in the patient's sweat before it is healed, and remove the puss from it.
And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is a small piece of bone or a large one, then you shall prepare those that are large with an instrument that suits them; and administer water to remove any of those on the instruments.
And if the wound from the plague is narrow, then you shall increase it with a scalpel according to the quantity of your need.
And then, once you have removed those that are large, and if any remain, then patch them up with calamine so that they are healed; and if any puss remains, place it under a plaster so that it is healed.
Chapter.v.
Restoring the fork when it is dislocated.
The bones of the fork are broken in one of three ways when the fracture is made from the front at the edge of the muscle.
It may be broken, separated, or separated into two pieces that do not cause any pain; and it is easy to restore it; or it may cause pain in some parts of the fork; and its restoration is difficult; or if the fracture is infected.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is infected, is that you present two assistants, so that one holds the fork and fixes it, and the other extends the blood vessel at the break.
And then bring the fracture together with the fingers so that it takes its natural shape, and not in its little prominence or concave shape.
And if you have a cold sweat, then pause the stinging of the patient' hand with a cloth or wool, and make the size larger or smaller according to your need; and extend and raise the fork, and fix it with a bandage so that it takes its correct shape.
And if you cannot fix the extremities of the fork to the outside parts, because it comes into contact with the neck, then the patient should be placed on his back; and place a cushion under his head, and position a cloth half the size in front of him.
And the assistant presses the muscle in front of where the bones of the fork are raised so that they are above the neck; and then you correct the fracture and bring it together with the fingers.
If you feel pain in the fork or it is difficult to move, then cut those out and remove them easily.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you shall use a sharp instrument from your tools that you have placed in water; for you have left the fork alone; and this is the shape of the instrument:
And it is like a horn from which this is the shape of the concave; and its size according to the water that you have provided for it, according to the size of the bone or the lack of it.
Then the length of the fork should be as it is for you to operate on; and there should be two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
And if the pain of the plague that you have cut out from the bone is wide, and you are sure that it is a puss, then you shall join the two edges of the wound with a stitch.
And if the disruption is little, or you fear puss, then you shall use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound.
And if any pain occurs, then pour wine vinegar and rosewater onto it, and place a cloth on it.
And all of this is to prevent the fracture from opening; and so that you may see the patient every day, if the bandage is wet or unfastened, then you shall correct what has been distorted and tighten the bandage.
And then place the patient to sleep on his neck, and leave the stinging of the neck slightly apart; so that the support of the neck is raised above the neck, and thus raise the fracture of the fork at the edge of the muscle; or let it rest against the neck.
And you shall not remove the bandage if there is no pain in it immediately or puss, until twelve days have passed.
And if he is seen to have a feverish face, then apply the plaster again and tighten it and restore that which has been broken; let rest until it has been healed and the fracture has been clotched.
And if he is strengthened and comforted according to the season in 28 days, and in some men it takes a longer time for that;
Chapter VI.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Shoulder-blade.
The spatula is broken in the place of the shoulder, and not broken from the shoulder, but only the edges are broken.
And when it is broken in the middle, and not known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in all ways; by means of which it can be done with ease.
Then sprinkle over the place a powder of wheat flour and stop it with honey; and place over it a cloth that is doubled, and place on it a thin board according to the quantity of the spatula, or less.
Or if in some places the place of the spatula is hollow, then you fill that hollow with honey; and place the board according to equality.
Then tighten it with a long hammer, and fasten the board so that it is not shaken from its place.
And consider the joint every day; and wherever it is soft, tie it again, and tighten the board if it is shifted from its place.
Then pull the patient onto his back.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when that number is completed, then you dissolve the joint, and that you know for certain that it is of the bones from which it did not break; nor did its dissolution cause any pain.
And if you cut the place of the bone and leave it with astringent; then you split it open, and stop it up; and do according to what has been said in the fracture of the clavicle by apothecaries' poultice if this occurs here.
Chapter VII.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Foot.
The foot, in some cases, is broken in the middle and then healed within; but the extremities of it are sometimes dislocated and broken.
And of the accidents of the foot when it is broken in the middle, that it tilts towards the inside and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, hard breathing, and vomiting; and is declared in the cavity of the bone that has been broken, and does not conceal itself from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be laid on his back, and a cushion placed between his thighs; and press the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it to the sides of two ribs, and make a point carefully in the operation of it and in the adjustment according to all ways that can be done so as to bring back the figure of the bone according to what can be done, until the figure of the bone is returned according to what has been said.
Then place the plaster and straw over it, and a board of thin wood placed under it; and tighten that which is on the shoulder, so as not to be moved; and consider the tightening every hour, and when it has become soft, tighten it again.
And if necessity compels you to remove the plaster from that part for any reason, or because of pain, or pus, which occurs in that place, then you cut and remove it, and correct that part by means of healing; and return the plaster to its place, if it has been removed a little way by water; and tighten that which is on it until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of the Restoration of the Ribs When They are Broken.
Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in the thick parts which join together; and does not occur at the extremities from dislocation, because they are cartilaginous. And the feeling of the patient is not hidden from inquiry by means of touch.
And the restoration be thus that it is joined together by means of touch according to all possible ways, until it is completely joined; and is plastered and tightened on the bone with a board, if you are afraid of that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the inside and dislocated, then occurs with it great pain and stinging, so as to occur with that which has been weeping, and because of the wetness of the bone; and happens with it a difficulty in breathing, coughing, and hard breathing; and this is difficult to heal.
And the ancient ways have been made by nature for those parts.
And for this purpose: that you stop the patient's eating, which causes swelling and inflammation, so that the belly may be swollen and extended, and the fracture driven towards the outside.
And let us avoid water, so that it does not cause a loose movement to generate pus by means of which the fracture is driven towards the outside; and if this already occurs, then help it on with water.
And they say that it is stopped from eating and let it drink strongly; and it is similar to reasoning, but yet is feared that drinking may throw out the excesses to the place because of its weakness.
And they say that the place be covered with wool which has already been soaked in oil, and let them be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so as to cover completely; and let it be cleaned from the patient by means of healing from weeping and medicine.
And if it causes great pain to contract the patient's skin, and the bone is poked by a sharp instrument, then they fear that the patient will die, so let them be covered over the place, uncover the rib that has been broken, and remove that which maintains the cypher, recalling the memory of it, and inscribe the bone with ease, and extract it.
Then let us adjust the two sides of the wound, if it is large, with a burn, and heal that part with plaster until it is healed.
And if pus occurs inside, then you cut and place in oil rosewater and place over the place, and let it be cleaned by means of healing water which has been covered with oil rosewater.
And be laid onto his back on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Vertebrae of the Back and Neck.
Sometimes the vertebrae in the neck are broken, and also at the base of the skull, and similar to the vertebrae in the back. And if you wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider, because if the patient's pain is lessened and his feeling of it is dull, and he can move those parts a little way, but feels pain when they are stretched or tightened, then you know that it cannot be healed, and in all cases of such a fracture, it is fatal.
And if those parts feel a constriction when touched and stinging, then you know that the vertebrae in the neck are saved, and the patient is healed by means of healing.
And if you see the vertebrae in the back similar to water, and wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider the patient's legs.
If the pain is already softened, it happens as it does to everyone, and if you get on top of him, there will be wind and excretion at his will, some are raised above their legs and want to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and do not work in his treatment.
But if there is no cause of those, the cause is better and lighter.
And the treatment of him is that you pierce to the spine behind it or hold a hot iron against it, or put molasses in his mouth so that he swallows it, or give him a drink; put it on that some are raised, and he will have relief.
Then put one of the poultices that comfort and exist, and strengthen it with a ligature; and order the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the part that hurts him so that he is healed.
And if there is a fracture of the bone or some cause that has already separated from him, then you cover it with a cloth and tie it up tightly and cut the two lips of the wound; and if they are large, then stitch them together; and then treat those with ingrown nails, so that he is healed.
But if the back of the leg is broken and this is the end of the fracture, then you cover it with a cloth and tie it tightly and cut the two lips of the wound; and if they are large, then stitch them together; and then treat those with ingrown nails, as much as possible by degree according to the situation; and put a poultice on him and wrap it up, if you want to, and strengthen it.
And if you feel a fracture in him, then you cover it and cut the wound; and treat it with treatment that precedes it so that it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of restoration of the limb.
The bones of the limbs are broken, and if they are broken, then their fracture is only a communication at the ends of them and they are lowered in length and decline to the ends; and pain occurs at the place and it pricks, and the chest is stunned when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of him is that you extend your hand over him so that it is above the fracture which is the figure of him.
And if the fracture is only at the end of him, then you swallow it according to what is on your body by degree so that it is put together with his natural figure.
But if the fracture is in length or has already declined to the ends, then you make him lie on his stomach so that he is prepared for you to restore that fracture. And when you have put it together, then put a poultice on him, and place a leather strap or ligature over it, and tighten it tightly so that there is no pain of fracture or movement of the stela.
And swallow the cavity with water that fills it up, within that it takes the tightness according to equality, and order the patient to sleep on his back or open his side.
But if there is an apoplexy, then you cease from the excretion of him and his treatment so that he is relieved from the apoplexy, and put a cloth over the water which is on it according to what has preceded; and then return to the treatment of him, and strengthen him in this way with a cloth.
And if there are fractures or they have been broken, then you treat them.
Chapter 11.
Of restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Adjuditor is that which is between the hip and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of him is in one of two ways, which is that you put a wooden staff on his back according to this form:
And they are tied with two ligaments, and be suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a stool; and then pour out his broken arm onto the wood in the place where it reaches to the top of him, so that it is attached to the curvature of the wood.
And suspend him over some difficult cause, or the patient's food is extended to his ends; and then give him medicine that the fracture joins together according to what has been done, so that the fracture returns according to what happens.
And the other way is that the patient is raised over his neck and suspended with a ligature from his collarbone; and then order two servants that one of them hold water that reaches the fracture with his hands; and another holds pus in him; and each of them extends to the ends of him.
And if you want the excretion to be stronger, then you strengthen it with a ligature on the fracture and on him with another ligature, and each of the two servants extends to his two ends.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then you cover it so that half of the ligament is over the cervical bone and the other is suspended on the fracture which is between them.
And apparently if the fracture is close to the hip, then you cover it so that the ligament is over the place and on the hip.
Swallow it with ease and work, and when it is put together according to what has been done, then strengthen it if there is no apoplexy.
But if there is an apoplexy, then let the tightness remain for seven days, and put a lamb's wool under it soaked in vinegar and oil, within that it stops the apoplexy, and then strengthen it.
And the way to strengthen that is to put a poultice on the fracture, and then cover it with a cloth; and then adjust his arms over the adjuditor, and place your hand on his back over the muscle.
And then put the cloth and strengthen it on the adjuditor's arm so that the arm is in place of the bone, unless it is forbidden by any cause of the broken leg.
Then use it.
And this is that you put a leather strap on the fracture which is stronger and more difficult on either side of it; and place between each stela the distance of a finger, and make the length of the straps according to the fracture plus three times the length of the whole limb.
And then strengthen them with a tightness that was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And this is that your tightness on the place of the fracture be stronger. And when the apoplexy has been relieved, then reduce the tightness.
And if you see how the situation of the straps and the tightness have changed since you restored the limb to its place, then you treat it.
And if you fear an apoplexy, then you leave the tightness and the straps for seven days since we have spoken about it.
And then consider the ligament in all its parts for three days so that it does not happen in the place of pressure or swelling; or if food is prohibited from reaching the limb due to an excessive tightness; and then correct everything according to what we have spoken about.
But if you are sure that there is no cause of it, then do not remove the ligature for three days or more.
And this is that the patient sleeps on his back, and his arms are over his neck; and his legs are over his chest.
And put a full lamb' wool on the adjuditor' coccyx, and consider it every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb does not change or that the ligament is soft, then correct the water completely with your power.
And place the patient's food according to the order we mentioned above, so that it is thin at first but becomes thicker as it is consumed. And then cover it when it thickens.
And it is usual that the servant and the cushion of the patient be tightened in ten days; and then release them, give a bath and medicate them with oil to heal those who are injured by it.
And if the fracture is not painful, then you do not release the bandage and the splint in a day or two months.
Chapter 12.
The Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones that are called the "forearm" and the "upper arm," respectively. The smaller one is what you call the "wrist," and the other is called "elbow," and it is from where the wrist starts to be separated.
Very strong is the fracture of only one bone, or both, very strong are their fractures together.
And when the small bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is faster.
But when the small bone is broken below, then the fracture is bad and its healing difficult.
And even worse when both bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small one above, then it is convenient to the doctor, in order to restore it, to make a small incision easily before that it is healed.
But if the big bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary that an incision be made more violently.
And if both bones are broken together, then you must cut them with a very strong knife.
And since you have fixed the limb of the patient on a cushion, and his hand is over the area, higher than all the others, and the ear is lower than all the others, and the patient lies on a raised bed.
And be a cushion in front of him or behind him, so that the patient does not work.
Then the minister extends the patient's arm with his hand or splint over him, and another minister puts a cloth on it.
And the doctor ties the bone in such a way that it does not move, according to the best figure he can make.
And if in the fracture of the bone there is a pain, then you should pierce it with an injection of your medicine in its place.
And if the fracture of it is not to your expectation in restoring it, then you must be careful and do it according to the method we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is painful, I have already written a special chapter, and then take the cure for it.
And if an apoplexy occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should place a thin cloth over it, made of wool and wax, and it should be neither too hot nor too cold, and a thick cloth should be placed under it, and then you should put plaster on it prepared with powdery molasses mixed with clarified honey, and place stirrups; and let the stirrup that is placed on that fracture be on one side and the other strong.
You know that the names of the splints of the arm are found in the majority of cases, or a fracture in one bone or both bones together.
And then you should place your stricture in the place of the fracture strongly and violently, and if it is remembered, as we mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, then place a little less violent one; according to that the memory of it comes back to mind at the beginning of this chapter.
And the clothes that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and smooth, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is sewed must be fine and strong, just as we have described.
Consider the limb with its splint for ten days. And if there is any reason to correct something, such as pain that occurs in the limb, then you should put it in water at the end, so that this pain stops.
And do not let the limb rest too long, and then return to tighten the splint.
And if the splint is already soft and the bone has healed with it, then you should correct everything according to your medicine.
And consider if the nutrition of the limb is prevented by the excess of the splint, for it is known that it softens a little and leaves it for several days so that the nutrition reaches it, and then tighten it again.
But if there is no reason for the causes that we mentioned, then it is not necessary to take it off within a certain time or environment.
Then hang the patient on a sturdy pole because of his ability to move, and let him sleep on his back.
You know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 32 days, and very strong is restored in 28 days, and everything is according to the method of complicated and strong methods.
Chapter 13.
The Restoration of Fractures of the Wrist and Hands.
You know that in the wrist and fingers with their nails there is often a fracture, and it does not occur at the end but in the middle.
And when it occurs in the hand or at its end, then the patient should lie on his back, and place his hand extended over him according to equality, and then tie it tightly with a cloth.
Then the minister extends the broken bones of the patient and ties them together, making a good knot.
Then you should put plaster and sand on it if there is no apoplexy, and place a stirrup above according to the quantity of space, and then you should wrap that in cloth.
But if the injury is inside the hand, from the back of the palm, then make a cloth cap, and order that it be tightened with the long cloth; and let the doctor tighten it.
Then place a coin of copper on the cloth where it is lifted up, so that the copper is applied to the palm, and tighten it according to what we have said above.
But if the fracture is outside the hand, then you should place a stirrup over it, and another one to the left of it in the palm, so that the hand can be opened; and then tighten the splint according to what we have mentioned above.
And if it is a fracture in the fingers of the hand, then, if it is the little finger, tighten it according to what we said above, and if it is the ring finger or the middle finger, then you should place an additional stirrup, as we mentioned above; and if there is no need to do so, then you should not tie it.
But if the fracture is in any of the other fingers, then place it at the same position as we mentioned above, or in the middle, or in the index, or in the ear, or in the ring finger, then tie them tightly with a cloth according to that finger; and if it is necessary to tie all of them together, then do so.
And consider, in your restoration, and tighten it above, the cure of apoplexy, as we mentioned above, according to the medicine of your doctor.
Chapter .XIV.
On the restoration of a broken bone in the thigh.
The thigh bone, once broken and set, is to be considered as a whole, considering the front part as superior and the back part as inferior.
And the restoration of it is to be done so that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament is left over the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on his belly and on his face.
And the minister extends all the ligament to its width according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is opposite to the root of the thigh, then extend the ligament towards the back at the edge of the fracture, so that the extension comes together, and leave the fracture with another ligament.
And if the break is opposite to the back, then extend the ligament towards the back and leave the extension at the edges.
And the doctor joins the bone together at both ends until it is reduced according to its natural shape and the bone is joined together well - then cover with plaster and tighten, if this does not happen to the limb it will put out. But if this happens in the limb, then leave it for a few days until the pustule opens, and then return to your treatment.
The tightening of it is to be done thus: cover with a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it twice or three times, and remove any excess; and then wrap up the leg so that it does not reach the thigh bone and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg at the back, to the edges, and bring the ends of the thread from the superior edge of the two parts, and then wind it around the leg and the thigh, and remove what is excess from the bandage.
And place on the thigh in the place of that fracture a long staff, and place another staff over the bone of the leg.
And fill up the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft stuffs, so that the tightening may be firm.
And begin the tightening of it strongly on the middle of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and when you have lessened the ligament at the place of the fracture, your tightening is to be lesser and lighter and moister.
And extend the two ends of the thread to the edges until it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the strings of the other part so that the ligament is not pulled out of its place.
And leave the tightening on it, in which case there should be no occurrence of pain or swelling or loss of breath or similarity to those; and if any cause occurs, then take care of it with care, and correct what has occurred, according to what we have said above.
But if the bone is heavy, then cover it according to what is possible for you; and if not, leave it open and treat it with water, and cure with that water in which it has been immersed until it heals.
In some cases this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by what is adjusted to it, as we have said above in the assistant and in the arms.
But in the restoration of it in such a way no occurrence of pain is to be expected; and if it is restored by itself, then apply another leg, which should always cause pain.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in ten days or a little more or less, and all of this depends on the variety of complexions and other conditions.
Chapter .XV.
On the restoration of a fracture in the heel bone.
Do you know that fracture of the tibia of the leg is more common than those on the outside.
May happen then that if fracture, then it is not so much as a crack or split in the bones and joints, and this is called a pain or ache, and on account of which all is done with attention.
And the repair of it is to be done in such a way that it may be joined together again, and fitted as well as possible, according to ease and convenience, and with proper material.
Then place plaster and bandage on that foot if you wish, and tighten it firmly so as to be suitable for the walk.
And consider all the provisions that we have recommended for other fractures, so also here, is to be done in such a way as to prevent any accident from happening on it, and in order to heal it completely until it is well.
Chapter 16.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the spine.
Do you know that in the back there are two bones, one of which is thick, and is called by name the spine; and the other is thin, and is called by name the breastbone?
May happen to any of the various fractures of the arm that may happen to the two bones of it, and for this reason the restoration of it is the same as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
And if you break both bones together, the back is broken in all its parts.
And if only the smaller bone is broken, the back is broken to the front.
And if you break the larger bone, it turns out on the side of the breastbone, and this is one of those causes that are not pleasing to you.
Then administer the necessary stretching and binding of the limbs according to that engagement.
However, if the fracture of the spine is caused by the bones not being able to move together, then the stretching should be less severe and more moderate, and it will please you.
And in the back there is a cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you bind the bones together with a rope or thong, and do this whole operation, then take some fists of a kind of wood, which are placed between the causes that are bound together, and which are not large, and are not suitable for big hands, and which are long according to the length of the back, and from the heel at the end on the side where it is thick.
Then wrap a cloth around each limb twice according to the length of it, and place one over the side of the back of one part and the other on the other side, and both from the heel at the end on the side where it is thick.
Then tie the two limbs at three places from the two extremities and at one place in the middle, for with this stretching the back does not curve to the right or left, and so it is good standing.
And one kind of wood has already been administered according to the length of the back; and let the spine be bound in order that it retain its mobility.
And finally, when you have broken this, then call it a disease properly so that it may be cured.
And consider the spine every day and study it well, so that you may know it better, and guard it from any swelling or inflation or similar causes; and if some cause of those happens, then prevent it on the patient in order that he be healed completely.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the neck and bones of the head and face.
To the neck there does not happen a fracture of all; but to the bones of the head there may happen a fracture in some places; and to the teeth only little does it happen, and happens to them only in the middle part of their disposition.
And if there is a fracture of the bones of the head and these are elevated above themselves, then the patient must be placed on the ground in preparation for this.
Then place one foot on that which is raised by those bones, and press it down, and bind them together within their places.
Then place plaster and bandage on it, and place under the stomach of the head a small table at which there are two faces turned towards each other.
Then tighten that by stretching it downwardly, for you have wrapped it with clothes and with other causes of which you are unaware.
And when three or four days have passed, then you will loosen the binding, because you would see the bones bound together, or broken or out of place; and the operation in those is like this.
And if any of these teeth are broken, then restore them, and bind those together in such a way that you may not forget how to restore the others of the mouth. Then place the broken tooth on that table according to its length, and place under it slightly to the left; then tighten that by stretching downwardly as you were told.
And if the broken tooth of the bones is two or three or more, then you place each one on a kind of tooth according to its quantity wrapped in cloth, and tighten the table at the bottom of the head, and let it stand on one of the faces of the table so that it has good retention.
It is convenient to you that you do not forget that you should take into consideration all the causes which I have told you in other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and prevent it on the patient from any accident.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the hipbone of the woman and of the arm of the hand and of the staff of the man.
When the hipbone of the woman is broken, then place it on two chairs, and tilt it slightly towards the side where it is thick; and let it be supported behind.
Then the wife should tie her hip on the chair, and sit it firmly there; and when the woman is moved, then raise the two small limbs little by little, for all this is done outside while looking at the side where the hipbone is thick so that it does not come out.
Then place a cloth over the two limbs, and when it wishes to urinate, remove the cloth quickly with ease, and reduce it again as it returns according to the manner in which it was placed at first; and return to its cloth first.
So that after seven days or less it is healed, for it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of oil and tighten it over the navel of the patient; and insert the whole bladder into the hipbone, and blow with force through the tube inside it so that the bladder is inflated within the hipbone, for the fracture returns.
Then let it be filled with oil and let it stand for several days according to what we have told you, until it is healed completely.
And when the arm of the man or woman is broken, then administer the restoration and binding of it as we have recommended for the hipbone.
This text is likely referring to the right-handedness of those who study and understand this book, as it emphasizes a certain directionality in understanding these medical treatments. As for the actual translation, I would need more context or specific sentences for an accurate translation.
If the arm of the man is broken, remove the bridle and put the arm in that; then place it over the wrap of cloth, wrapped up, and leave it for three days or more, healed.
Chapter .xxi.
Of the Restoration of Broken Bones When They Have Begun to Putrefy.
Convenient is to that person to whom the fracture has occurred, and more so if the bone is large, as that of the thigh or of the pelvis, or similar to that, that you keep it well and bleeds it often, if the conditions of bleeding allow you, thus as not to be in danger of death.
And if the plague has subsided, then know that you keep it in confinement until you powder on its leg three times, unless another cause presents itself.
And then begin to restore the fracture in that day of rest, and do not prolong it, unless you see pus.
Unless you see pus, then leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, lest it putrefy, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth, for you will cause a bad accident.
If the broken bone is about to come out of its socket, then know that you shall reduce it and bring it in with your hands easily and a little extension.
If the extension is not prepared and the balance of it with your own hands, then reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight fingers and its width is two, and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the quantity that you need to heal in total in any kind of fracture.
And be soft, and be little thick because it is not necessary to bend the compression on it at the time of the operation.
And be sharp in its edges, and be thick towards the center, and of the thickness of it tend to the feet, and of the majority of it into the joints.
This is how it is made:
It is called in Greek "labra volentz atelarem", which means "soft-bound palm".
So that the end of it is raised above the end of the bone that is about to come out.
And wrap it in a cloth until it returns the bone, and bring it in with some kind of mold.
And then try to wrap the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is small, and you do not have a good instrument, then know that you must cut the end of that bone with an instrument.
If you cannot reduce the bone at all with that which we have described, then cut it with an instrument that cuts well, or break it with one of the hands.
Then remove what remains in the bone of small scrapes and cuts.
And when the bone has been reduced, and the pain of the patient is very intense, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and at that time treat the patient with great care.
Once your restoration is complete and you wrap it in black cotton cloth, especially if it is summer, and do not place anything on the wound or cause any friction, lest it cause corruption and decay.
And then administer the medicine of the completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered in order to cut it with scissors and use wraps according to the quantity of the plague.
And guard it with great care that you do not increase the plague with the fracture, for useless and unhealthy methods cause death or bad health, and it heals badly. And if the patient's compression is loose, soft, different from the compression of other fractures.
If the plague is great or is a bad plague that you are afraid of may happen to it, and you feel pain in its location, then know that you do not place anything on it, but wrap it in tough cloth instead of blankets, and strengthen it with iron.
And when a day or two after the plague begins to appear, that it may be born, then you remove the cloth from it which you had placed on it with a cloth of our custom to treat plagues, thus with four-fold medicine and similar to that.
Know that you should remove the joint and consider the plague in every day and night until it is hardened, and know that the member should be prepared in such a way that the decay runs from it to the joints easily.
If the plague has passed a few days, and it is neither hardened nor separated from the joint, then know that there are only a few things to do, and if you keep the patient away from these things, the plague will heal quickly. Of those that heal slowly and do not separate, those that do not separate and place the member, causing pain, then know that you can cut them in this way: if it is possible for you to cut it.
If the plague has become bitter or rotten, then know that you should pause a few days from those things which I have described to heal it; and if you need anything more, read the following chapter.
And about this one in which you can speak your mind and present your request: if the foot is broken, apply to it with the arm of the coiled cow and similar to those of the large members, and do not trust too much on it, nor take it out too soon; because death may come suddenly through it. Leave it inside that it may heal well, for a strong hand breaks easily. And then treat the plague if you see it, and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter .xx.
Of the treatment of a sore that occurs in the trace of some fracture.
This sore occurs in the trace of a healed fracture, and more so if it is near the joints, and it is recognized by the shape of the member; and it is very firm that you do not operate its natural movement.
Then consider whether the sore is new and administer those medicines that have stimulated it, and then wipe, and sniff it, and try it with your fingers, and if you feel pain take some or all of them, and wrap them in cloth for a good compression.
Then leave that member alone for a few days; and then remove it and repeat the operation, unless you feel pain, because lead has the property of inflating all that is inflated in the members.
If the sore has already become a bad one and causes pain, then know that you must cut it by a wide incision, and then remove what is excess and prominent, and if you feel pain, stop; and heal that which needs to be healed.
Chapter  .xxi.
Of the Restoration of Fractures When Restored, and then return the member to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is healed, and the limb is still swollen and tender, there are several possible causes: one is excessive use of the joint and the resulting lack of mobility; or, due to strictness of the joints which blocks the flow of food to the limb; or, due to an abundance of useless grease; or, due to excessive movement at the wrong time; or, due to a lack of blood in the body and its circulation.
And treatment for him is to have him eat and make his heart strong before the disease multiplies in him; and give him baths; and put on a girdle and light.
Then pause pressure on the limb so that the pressure brings food to him, or continuous moisture from him, so that the food flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter.XXII.
Of the cure of broken bones, when they are restored by twisting and the operation of them is prohibited from him when it covers.
When the already restored limb happens to be deformed and to have a knotted shape, and it is due to the limb's lack of its usual function; however, the limb does not prohibit its natural operation, then do not take the words of one who exists that such a limb was newly knotted.
However, there are already some foolish medicines and restorative remedies that have been done to him in our land; and this operation is very evil, losing the sign of which is deadly.
However, if the claudication and nodulation are recent, then they should be moistened with water in which herbs that soften them are boiled; as well as leaves of arnica and yarrow, and similar things to those; or, if it is a paste of soft herbs, well-prepared, or if it is a poultice made with the broth of garlic, and applied with it; or, if grass-fat figues are boiled and triturated, and applied with fennel seed; or, if they are fresh figues that are boiled and triturated, and applied to them.
And some times it is dissolved with slow friction that is moistened and applied to the most wet, and is administered limb motion at all times.
However, if the twisting has already begun at the front and is strong, and it becomes a problem and causes the need for treatment with iron; then do not take the words of one who exists that such a limb was newly twisted. However, if it is twisted slightly at the front and is no longer twisted; then take care to remove all excess of nodulation from that limb using very fine instruments, and administer it with ease and attention.
Chapter.XXXIII.
Of talking in dislocation.
Dislocation is very much of one of the joints of the limb, by which it is prohibited from moving, and the shape of the limb is changed, and great pain and damage comes to the patient.
Therefore, when you happen to have a dislocation, then immediately cut it so that it is reduced, and do not delay reducing it; because if it is delayed, the limb becomes putrefied and difficult for it to be reduced.
And therefore do not stand or sit up during the apotheosis; because visible muscles bring about spasms and pains in the body.
However, when it happens to you, then take care that you hide the limb from the flabotomy, and allow it to rest until the apotheosis has passed; and take care that the limb is moistened with water and oil, and reduced with ease.
And the whole limb be cured with water from which the memory will come back to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to which follows a fracture; from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Chapter.XXIV.
Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
So dislocated the two jaws if they are not tensed by little movement, and are slightly softened; or so dislocated by entire dislocation and complete, so that they are softened at the joint's start, before the saliva leaves the patient's mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its words.
However, when the dislocation of him is little, then in most cases it returns by itself because there is a little cause.
However, if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it should be reduced slowly, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister has the head of the patient, and inserts it in the mouth of him at the part where the dislocation is inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from one side; or he inserts the two sides together, if the dislocation is from both sides, and the others are outside where they belong; and orders the patient to cease his jaw and perform those motions that can; and he wraps the jaw and ties it up, so that it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of him is difficult, and more so if both of the jaws are completely dislocated, then administer vaporization with water and oil; so that the reduction of both is easy, and do not delay reducing both at all, for I have already said.
And therefore, when you return and are wrapped up, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on those dusts of cloth with a cotton ball, and make it with wax and rosin; and do so with ease on soft limbs.
And let the patient sleep on his two sides, and his head be between two pillows, so that he does not sniffle on either side; and do not force him to drink anything; and have his food be forbidden meat, so that when the pains return and the jaws are locked, then sniffle what you want.
And let it be administered with ease, and do not work on the appearance of the mouth while eating or drinking or speaking; so that the jaw is locked and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not reduced to their places, then immediately take care that visible muscles appear; and great pain and a sudden fever come, and strongly contract the abdomen of the patient, and suddenly vomit pure blood.
And when you see this, then know that it is a waste of time; and take note of the days when it happens to him.
Chapter.XXV.
Of reducing the dislocation of the fibula and the end of the muscle.
The fibula is not dislocated from the leg' end because of its continuity with the foot; and some times it is dislocated from the front, and then pain is felt.
And the restoration of him is that the patient plays with his two sides and spreads his arms. Then tighten the joint with your hand with a firm tightening, because it will return.
Then pause over that paste and dusts, and strengthen it.
However, the end of that which secures it and is continuous with it, is never dislocated in any day; then should be reduced and wrapped up according to what I have said, and according to your custom.
And place it on that plaster, and powder, and tighten up, and order the patient to remain calm and quiet until it is healed.
And this injection cure reduces the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter .xxvi.
On the Reduction of Muscular Dislocation.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the starting point of the tendine to the starting point of the tendon.
And the second is that it is dislocated from the starting point of the muscle, and then it comes off; and it is not dislocated from the back through the shoulder, nor from the front through the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and comes off from the starting point of the tendine on the sides, and mostly in those who are thin-skinned, it comes off with difficulty; but in those where there is much flesh, it is easily dislocated.
And a strong blow happens to certain men by percussion or impact, and the muscle of them is torn from tore, and is recognized by the one who has already been dislocated.
Then tell me that you are not sure about this because you were on top of him, and then proceed with the cure for him.
And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is on the sides away from the tendon; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, because you can tell them apart very clearly; and you touch the back of the muscle with your finger, so that a sound comes out like a whistle, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor make that movement.
If it is dislocated from below or above, and you feel a clear touch, and it does not hide itself.
And of this dislocation there is a little reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand to its starting point; and he places the strings on either side of the tendon, and raises the joint with strength at its place, and the minister raises the hand, and extends it in front of him; and then he places those on either side because it returns with difficulty.
But if by this water it does not return, and only from the beginning that the dislocation has happened, then when the patient is bathed in warm water and massaged with liniments so that they become soft and smooth as if their hair were cut with a razor, and fenugrec and melilot are added to the water, and it is administered.
Then the patient is to be put on his back and held in position with a strap that goes from his shoulder to his hip, waiting for the hair to grow between the tension and tightness, and then the doctor places his foot on the spine, and raises the joint with strength, and the minister holds the patient's head so that it does not move towards the sides, because that moment returns to its place.
And if you want, reduce this second way: and it is that you have another man present who is longer than the patient, and he stands on the side of him, and inserts his hand under the tendon from behind, and raises the tendon of the patient up to its starting point while the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister holds the patient's head so that it does not turn towards the sides, for thus the patient returns to its place. But if the patient is very ill, then when you know that another cause is responsible for his suspension, so that this one returns because the dislocation comes back quickly.
And it is reduced and another way: that a long pole with a round top, like a staff of mortar, that is neither too thick nor too thin, is placed behind the patient; because it is placed on the top of the staff, and the patient stands according to its length, and his hands are extended towards the sides with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this cure: and that you take a pole whose length is equal to two arms, and whose height is four times the distance between the shoulder and the elbow, and whose thickness is reduced at the top of the tendon according to this figure:
And then place it on the top with a round staff, like a staff of leather, so that the pole does not slip from the patient's hand.
And then the staff is placed behind the tendon of the patient, and the hand or arm is extended towards the sides with strength, until it reaches the starting point, and the staff is held tight by the assistant and the arm and the tip of the hand.
And then the arm is placed on a step according to its height, and the hand is extended towards the sides, and the other side is suspended from the other part, because the joint returns quickly.
And when the instrument is completed according to each of your possible methods, and you pause behind the tendon with a rope that reaches from one shoulder to the other, then apply a prepared paste made of powder of molasses and egg white on all the muscle, so that it is turned upside down, and then tighten it with a strap below the tendon with tension; and let the ligament be turned over the paste, and the hand be connected to the neck, and be left like this, and not be held by the hand for seven days.
And when the patient's food is stopped briefly, until his member is comfortable, because it is better to wait for its recovery.
And then the food should be given every seven days or more, and exercise be made with the movement; and if it stops being soft and does not become so again, then it has healed.
But if the joint is dislocated with visible moisture that occurs on it or for some other reason, then when cauterization is performed in front of it according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this does not heal and the ligament is loose on it after seven days, then you know that its nerves are cut or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will never return to its place.
And from the dislocation of that which is done from below or above, the reduction is made with a sudden movement and extension to its maximum, while it returns.
And let that other tension be administered, and let that cure be given until it is healed.
And if the recovery of the patient is delayed and there is little movement in his limb, then the patient uses water with visible moisture until that gravity is removed from him and he returns to his natural state first.
Chapter xxvi.
On the Cure of Muscular Dislocation.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with great difficulty and seems to return with the same difficulty; and it is dislocated from all sides, mainly from the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden when you adjust the dislocated one to its place, and then you declare it clearly because the joint is rounded and cannot bend the arm or touch with its hand according to some shape.
And when these cushions are put in place and the dislocation is reduced so far forward that it reaches the patient's chest, for if it reaches the patient's chest, reducing it is difficult, and it does not heal completely; and more so when it is at the back, because it is worse than all other types of dislocation and causes great pain and many blisters should be put on to prevent death.
And the restoration of it, when it is that which can be reduced, is that the hand of it is extended to two times more, and the arms of it are spread out, and the sides of the body are placed on the cushion and leave it, and he presses the joint with its fingers or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is at the front, then return it like this that he doubles his hand with his own hand, until he strikes the knee with his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer violent beating and very strong.
And it is that two ministers extend their arms, and hold this support for him two ministers so that he does not be shaken by the beating.
Then return it like this that is wrapped a long folded cloth around his hand, or else.
And when the patient touches the joint with his hand, oil it with some oil so that those causes which help in lubrication of the joint with ease; and then press the joint with a violent push until it returns.
And the reduction of it, when it is placed on that cushion in which there is stinging and excision with alum of lead, and it is extended with a stricture downward, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for some days.
Then untie it; and if the joint is formed in its place, then untie the cloth from it and leave that one.
And if you see that the joint is not strong, then untie that cloth and tie it again, and leave that one for some days until it is dried up; and then untie it.
But if gravity occurs to it in the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidification in a bath and gentle friction and compression, until it is relieved; or pause over the joint that is relaxed, so it is covered with a thick cloth; and then tie it, and leave that one on the bone for a day and night. Then untie that one, and put it in a bath; and when it is relaxed, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat over that one that is relaxed, so it makes noise of movement, once, twice, and third time, The corruption has already come about on the skin of the body through the bath water, so that it is not limited.
And if you want, pause over that wound of cow that is wet and scraped with the border and press on it; and make several strokes, because that one is wet and reduces its disposition.
Chapter 28.
Of treatment of a dislocation that is in the shoulder, if it is at the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
A dislocation of the hand has been moved, and the reduction of this dislocation is slight, and the opposite is true for other joints; but nevertheless, when it occurs that a dislocation is at the shoulder, then the reduction of it is quickly, before the place where it occurred reaches an apoplectism or if it occurs in an apoplectism.
The reduction of the dislocation is that you stop the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of it, and the patient stops his side or his palm over the edge of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its place.
But nevertheless, when the palm is already shown to the belly of the hand, then the patient stops the two sides of his hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, then stop the two sides of the hand, then place the hand of it intricately on the table, so that the side of the body covers that edge of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, then that is good; and if not, then return it with a cloth that gives an apoplectism and leave it; and do not repeat that, because there does not suffer nor can about the reduction of it for more than days.
But nevertheless, the joint is second to its tortuosity; and there does not appear to the patient any cause, but the hand becomes soft and cannot be strong for any cause; then you know that the nerves are thin or many, and then it is not suitable to put a strong cautery on it at the bottom of it, because it can give some cause.
Then when the hand has returned to health, then return it on that cloth which you have re-covered, and leave it and strengthen it for five days; and then untie it and exercise the hand.
But if the movement of it is still and occurs in it some gravity, then untie that one with a tail of water and several strokes, until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
Of treatment of a dislocation in the fingers.
Some strokes are dislocated from the beginning.
And when any finger is dislocated from the two sides of the palm or the belly of it, then press the joint and press its ends together, until it returns.
Then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that one from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave that one for two days.
Then hang that one up and extend that one within that day.
And when night comes, then hang that one again according to that description, and do not stop untying that one during the day and exercising its movement, then hang that one at night; and make it straigh for several days.
And do the same to the patient, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and hang that one from the side to which it is dislocated, and make the first operation of that one, until it heals.
And in the same way, do to the patient if it is dislocated at the other sides.
Chapter 30.
Of treatment of a dislocation in the spine of the back.
And when it occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and if some vertebrae do not move, then that is a complete dislocation; and if death comes to the patient, then put a pillow under him.
And the sign of that one is that the vomit of the patient comes out without will; and it cannot hold those; and some members of its body or two sides of its clothes, or both of its clothes, or two bras of its body, or one of them; or if a vertebra moves from its place, because that sign appears and that sign appears.
Then that one is already re-moved to the back sides and is called gibletness.
But the treatment of it is that you consider if gibletness comes from a child, because then there is no cure or healing for all.
But in that one that is dislocated by chance or by beating or similar to those, the old doctors have said many ways of treatment, some of which return with profit; and I have seen that one with which they are less profit, because it is near to my ear due to its nearness to my mouth; and with this I have heard and formed a different instrument from that with which I will show you and expand it.
And those are not cured except where it occurs in the two correctly as I have recommended it.
And the patient is extended on his face on a bed near the wall, and extended underneath him a moist instrument so that his feet are not touched.
Then a stick is placed upright, fixed to the ground at the end of the foot around the head of the patient, and another stick is raised between the feet on the other side.
And the minister holds the stick, and does not place it in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And wrap the head of the patient and leave the latters to tickle his head hard; and extend the end of the latters to the stick that is meant for his head, and lay this on him; and approach the other latters and tighten them around his hips, leaving his legs uncovered, and adjust all the latters and lay these on the other stick that is meant for his feet.
And the minister drops the stick at the front of the two sticks and the latters that are meant for his limbs in their places, however, they are not tied in this way as I have said.
And the doctor places his palms on his spine with strength until he returns or puts them on a table, and approaches him to adjust his feet on the table before he returns.
But if he does not return in this way, then take a table whose height or length is in a line with three brasas, and dig into the wall where I have said that the patient should be placed a place in which the end of the table meets. And place the middle of the table on his spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and adjust it well so that the spine is pinched and he returns to his place.
And if you want to, open the door that is rolled with your hand; and it is that you are on the ground the head of the patient at the back of the foot two sticks, the length of which is one braza, and the head of the patient at the back of the foot only two sticks; and let the length be between each stick a palm, and it has already been made in each stick through which the ball runs, and each is stopped on the ground so that it does not move.
And be a round stick in which the door is opened, and let it be rolled in the two turns of the two sticks.
And at the end of him is a turn in which the stick is formed, whose length is a palm to that it is rolled; and similar are the other two sticks.
And tighten the latters that you have placed on the feet of the patient in the turn that is meant for his head, and the latters that you have placed on the hips of the patient in the door that is meant for his feet.
And approach each door and place a minister who twists the door with his hand, and the doctor pinches his spine as I have said.
And when the spine has returned and its place is taken, then cover with a dry alumen, and wrap; and approach to put it on a table whose height is a third of six or around that quantity, and its length be the amount that takes up the space of the gelbosity, and at the front of the spine.
And let it be tied with the latters that I have said, and use the patient's food subtly as healing.
And if there is any urgency in the place at the end of the healing, then cover to be administered medicines that soften and smoothen for the administration of the table over a long time, which I have recommended; and it has been administered at that place lead of lead.
And in some cases an imminence occurs at the back of the two spines, and it is detected by that dislocation; and this is the bone from which you have already noticed because it does not cover that he should be made to take this medicine, for it will be very difficult for him to die.
Chapter 31.
Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not come except by dislocation, and that it does not happen to those that happen to the other joints with little movement and concavity.
And the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated on the inside, or on the outside, or in front, or behind.
And most commonly it is dislocated on the inside, and less in front or behind.
And the sign of the dislocation of him to the inside is four, when you adjust the curvature of the patient with his back to the spine, it becomes longer and its back more curved than that of a healthy person, and the patient cannot bend his tongue because it is broken; and this is the place where the tongue is broken by a break.
And the sign of that which happens to him in dislocation is to the outside, because the accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
And the sign of that which happens to him in dislocation to the front is four, however it does not bend that way because of the pain that it causes; and if it goes out through the front, his urine is held back and his tongue is broken, and he should walk on a stick.
And the sign of that which happens to him in dislocation to the back is that it does not spread out his back, nor can he bend his tongue forward because it bends his tongue; and his curvature is shorter than that, and his tongue is softened, and this is the place of the tongue.
However, the reduction of these spices in this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already been noticed because it was made to take a reduction from him, and if it is not in that cure of all; and therefore it does not cover that he should be made to take this reduction.
However, in that which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should set the joint back to its place and extend it on the inside and outside, and turn it towards the right and left, for a strong person returns and does not need any other cure.
However, if it does not return in this way, then cover that you prepare a minister strong and extend the back of the patient from the side where it is closest, or on his back, or with a lanyard that is tied around his back; and another minister extends the hand of the patient from behind his head, so that his feet are not touched; and tie the other lanyard to the foot of the patient.
And let it be extended from him or from the inside to the tongue at the back of the jaw, or from the back to the tongue at the front of the throat.
And let all these be extended in one way so that the patient is raised to his side on a table, and let it hang hanging.
And this type of expansion is similar to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and otherwise, it is necessary for all kinds of water that I say about their own cure.
In the reduction of him himself, when dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inside, cover that the patient is raised over his own side; and approach the ligaments on the ridge of the crotch at this place which lies between the head of the crotch and the place where the tongue is left; and extend the ligament in its part of the leg on the uppermost part of the femur.
And another minister takes hold of the legs with great power, and rubs the thick part of the crotch with violent expansion; because that returns to its place.
And this type is the most difficult cure for this member is reduced, than for other types of treatment.
But if it is lifted up by you and does not obey the entrance into this type of treatment of all, then consider that the two feet of the patient are tied together with a strong ligature; soft, gentle, on both toes and both heels.
And the length of each one of them by the quantity of four said, and the crotch is extended more than the other by a quantity of two said.
And the crotch is suspended above the top of the post, and it is on the greatest; and the length of him is from the ground a quantity of two feet.
And another young man takes hold of the head of the crotch and it is suspended on him himself with a strong strap; because the joint returns to its place by speed.
But in the reduction of him himself, when dislocated to the outside, consider that the patient watches his own foot according to what we have said by taking off his shoes and socks; and be strong the ligament on the crotch itself and on the feet.
And two posts are placed, the one on the feet of him himself and the other on his head; and two posts are adjusted in the middle of the foot where the drape is wrapped over it, so that the patient is not dampened by the post being between the thighs of him himself, otherwise the expansion to the outside will be pulled.
And each minister extends in its part, and the doctor with his hand embraces the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front, consider that the crotch is extended gently, and it is according to this narration about a post; and the doctor pauses his right palm on the crotch of him himself, and approaches that place with the other hand, and at that corner extends that which is placed on both sides to the outside.
And if the dislocation is to the back, then consider that the crotch is extended to the outside, and it is lifted up from the ground; because he is placed on a hard surface, so that when the width of him is dislocated to the inside, according to what we have said about his expansion between two widths, and its sides are extended, as we have said, there is no resistance.
And consider that the compression is applied to a table on the place where the joint is located.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as you said— and the symbol of the reduction of him himself does not retreat to you, and it is that you extend two crotches for him, and when you see those crotches and he extends his own crotch by a band like that it is not broken in either of the sides; then you tie him up on rest for three days or four.
And then release the ligament and the bandage, and compare one crotch with the other.
And then, if you see those crotches in a vestment, then you know that the dislocation is already stopped, and let him go.
And if you see any sign of softening, then you return and bandage that one again, and extend it according to your first extension, and let him rest for three days.
And then release that one, and make that one walk a little bit every day until it is comfortable again.
Chapter LXXII.
Of Treatment of Dislocation from the Bottom.
The bottom is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated to the outside, and to the inside, and to the outside at the back; and it is not dislocated to the front.
And the symbol of dislocation for him himself is that you command the crotch to apply its own crotch; then you know that the bottom is dislocated.
And the restoration of all his ways is that you take hold of him with your right hand, and then consider that he has already extended his own crotch, if he can on it; attach the two ties to his face, and pause his feet between the ties; and another minister extends his legs between the ties over his back with strength, and another minister attaches his feet to your palms, and those between the ties on his heels with strength, and another minister raises his legs up until the bottom returns to its place.
And the symbol of recovery for him is that his crotch adheres to the crotch with a light, gentle movement.
And then bandage that one and attach his crotch to the crotch, and then tie those ties on a band with a light band for three days or four, and then release those ties.
And do not use the crotch for walking for some days, until it is healed and comfortable again.
But if the reduction of him to you is justified, then consider that I will administer a strong expansion for those ligaments in the treatment of the post.
Chapter LXXIII.
Of Treatment of Dislocation from the Top.
The top is sometimes relieved by a little removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement, and its dislocation is caused or to the inside or to the outside.
And the symbol of dislocation for him is that he deflates at the place where he is dislocated.
And the treatment of his removal is of gentle recovery, and it is that he is extended with ease until his place and is enclosed so that he returns to his place.
And in the treatment of him when he is dislocated according to the complement, consider that you take hold of him with your right hand, and have another minister who is strong and capable at his back in the middle position of him himself.
And then turn yourself to me with your right palm on the top of the highest part, and with your left hand on the lowest part of the foot in its position.
And then throw his feet to you with your right palm, and then with your left hand for two times, and then extend them with your left hand; and bandage the feet with your right hand while his legs are working under the band.
And make him walk two times according to what we have said.
And bring the feet of the foot to the third bed, and you are on the mat.
So return in one or two veiled like this way, and if the foot is covered, it is good; and if not, then do the operation again over him, because he returns.
But if to you it is forbidden to reduce him thus that we have mentioned, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put a sheet over him, and wrap him in clothes, and you will see.
And the minister of him has his knees, and another minister extends the foot on its feet or lightly on the hip; and another minister extends that against the extension of his side, and the cushion is extended between the thighs of the patient to hold it so that its back is not pulled at the joints.
And the doctor holds the dislocation with his feet, and another minister holds the sound knee at the joint, because the dislocation comes easily.
And now that the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction of him, then pause and apply oil strongly, and bind the foot to the bed.
And watch out for or protect the nerves that are behind on the tibia, so that the joint over it is not violent and tears it strongly.
Then let him lie for two days or three; and if the joint has softened, then apply oil to him.
And after that time, then wash him with water on the third day, and forbid the patient to move for ten days. But if it is necessary to move forward that space, it is not safe that the dislocation is over him dissolved and corrupted, and then apply oil so that he does not receive treatment.
But if it happens to him that the poultice is hot, then watch out for you to apply on his body water in which we preceded in our narration, in another place of treatment and ointment, until it is cool again.
Chapter.
Of treatment for the dislocation of the toes.
But if the one who is dislocated is covered with a little oil, it will work better; and that which is not difficult, advance slowly.
But if the dislocation is in a certain number of toes of the foot, then watch out that you make a cut on his body over the ground or table, and let him go like this; and let him walk thus.
And then you stand on your feet, and pause the big foot over it that is under the joints, and then step on him with your big toe carefully so that he returns, and you see if it is covered and not in the prominent place.
And then pause the belly of the foot on a table that takes all of it, which are two heads, and then tighten him well and firmly for three days; and then wash him and let him rest from walking for ten days, until he is healed and his recovery is assured.
Chapter.
Of the species of dislocation that are caused by plague or fracture or any combination.
When such a cause happens to you, and you are engaged in the treatment of that person and in the recovery of him, watch out for the following things:
And by the foot do not presume over the treatment of him, but that which is skilled in the art, long-suffering, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not impatient nor proud; and that uses in the beginning of medicine that soft poultices so much only, and lets the patient to the divine judgment, but you hope for salvation from destruction, with the alleviation of evil, and in which there appears some hope. And then try to make him well as soon as possible from the beginning of the cause, before he develops a poultice of caustic.
And then if the member returns as soon as possible, then administer to him that soft poultice that heals the plague with water that you give him of the herbs drying.
And if the dislocation is from a fracture and you hit the bones that are separated, then you strike them with your staff, and do in him so that he does not have simple pain of him who has preceded in the places of those.
And protect and avoid according to your ability that instrument in the paths of fear according to which you have preceded my proclamation; for it is better to you devotes the Creator, and remains permanent in your glory, and salutes the true face of him who is in the true time. Thus ends the words of Al-Bucasımi clearly explaining the reasons for which God did not want to be worshiped. Amen.
