O son, I give you this book, which is the last of medical science, for its completion leads to it; and for its explanations, and its declarations, I see that I fulfill it for you as a treatise, which is part of surgery.
For surgery is prostrated in our region and in our time completely deprived, so much so that it is dangerous science; and its evidence remains; and it was not except for a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which change them into error and confusion within that they are closed the interpretations of them and is elongated the force of them and art.
And I see that I have animated it with an order of this treatise in that second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes to the forms of tools cauterizing and other instruments of the work by addition of the declaration, and preparation of it, which is necessary cause.
The reason why a good craftsman does not excel in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that his actor before being practiced in the science of anatomy which covers Gualia within that he knows the growth of limbs and forms of them, and the connection and separation of their; and has the understanding of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the number of those, and the structure of them. And the pulsing veins and quiet ones, and places of impression of them.
And therefore I say that by a name is it known, more in the small work, and most in the art of surgery.
More, we have said of this in the introduction of this book; for who does not know that I have told you of anatomy, it is not necessary that he falls into an error by which men die; for thus are found many of them, for they are formed in this science and get away from that one of that science and its experiments.
For I saw a doctor come out and experiment to have hit an escrophyl apoplema in the neck of a woman, and hit some arteries of the neck so that blood flowed heavily from it; that the woman fell dead among her people.
And I saw another doctor who said that he would drink a stone from a man which had passed in his state; and the stone was large, and it came to him and dried up that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I called to him to draw out that, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the patient's disposition, I knew for sure that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a stipendium from a duke of our land for surgery; and he put the patient on a black cauldron that was broken in his crotch; and prepared the doctor because of his ignorance, drawing out the fracture, on the plane, with powder and needles to strengthen it, and did not leave the plane to breathe.
Then he returned the second time according to his desires, and he returned the prayer, and he returned the release by some days and commanded that we release the bond; and so it was, then the crotch and the foot are opened, and come to ruin.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to release the bond, and achieved peace and ease of their pains.
But however, corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and I did not stop the movement of corruption in the member until the patient was in peril.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous apoplema; and it became ulcerated by a few days, so that the malice of it was increased by the Lord of it.
For that reason is that the cold cauterization is pure of melancholic humor; therefore it does not cover that it comes to him by all means, but that it is in a member which you suffer that of all things is host.
And therefore, son, it is necessary for you that the operation at hand be divided into two parts: one in the operation to which health is associated, and work in the performance of which danger is present.
And I have already done here in all places of this book in which it is wrong and fear; so that it is necessary for you to guard here and let those go, so that the pages do not rob your way to speak and distract you.
And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your misfortunes with kindness and constancy.
And use the best way by the grace of God to attain to salvation and the laudable succession, and leave the terrible difficulties of difficult recovery; and retain your weapons from here that you may be afraid, so that it is left in your faith and your name does not escape: for it remains to your glory, and later, at the end, to your sanctifications.
Gualia has already been said in some of its warnings: "Do not prescribe evil medicine, so that you do not give bad doctors."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered from the head to the feet, in the shapes of tools and instruments of cauterizing, and that is necessary in the operation.
Begin the division of the second part. The second chapter is divided into two parts: the one which is for the operation of the sides and the other for the operation of the heart; all well ordered and arranged according to the shapes of tools.
The third chapter is divided into three parts: the one which is of the restoration and displacement, and the cure of twisted things and similar to them; a chapter well ordered from head to foot, and of the shapes of tools.
I will tell you the quality of the growths of that cauterizing and the danger of it; and in what combination it is forbidden to cauterize.
Then I say that the speech of the quality of cauterizing and the danger of it is long and wordy, and subtle by science, and hidden; and of it has spoken much wisdom, and I am satisfied with a little of their speeches, for they are long.
And therefore I say that cauterizing confers on all combinations universally; which are two combinations, which are combination of tail and head, and the head of the tail.
In the combination of tail and dry matter is disagree; for some say that cauterizing is beneficial to that, and others say the opposite, that cauterizing is not suitable in a dry disease which has quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable that such a dry disease be healed.
And he who says the opposite of that, that by cauterizing is made beneficial in all dry disease which has quality and dryness, because when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of them to the combination of fire, you find the bodies of men burning.
And I say by the word of that, which I have already experienced here sometimes to discover.
But however I do not cover that come on this it which he is already exproat and excersitat in the chapter of cautery per latter exercise, and knows the difference of the complexity of men and the disposition of the maladys in their meteyssas, and causes of those, and the accidents of their, and the space of time of those.
Mays in the other complexities, it is not upon you fear, and most importantly in the maladys that are moist and cold, because all doctors have agreed on those, and do not differ in the exercise to make cauterization in them.
And you know, children, that of the secret of cure by cautery with fire and of the goodness of it, is because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach but to the member that is cauterized and not to the other member by the application thereof but to a slight injury.
The action of the burning medicine reaches to that in the members which makes it very hot, and does not cool but brings fever; it very much hurts the member that is being cauterized, but does not hurt that which is opposite.
Mays the fire, for its smallness and its substance goodness does not cause it but that which is superfluous; And I have already known by experience and by length of service in the study about the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of the speech And if it were not that it is not read at my hand in a moment to you hidden with the fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and of its expulsion by which it expels the maladies, by philosophical speech, which would serve to acute your ears.
And you know, children, that the seasons do not agree as to the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the injury by the time is immersed in the movement of it which is drawn out by cauterization, and more if cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer delay because of which they are feared from those that come evil, which is greater than a small injury entering through time.
And thus do not make it in your ears, or children, this I say to you, but that the popular and foolish people consider; so that to those diseases which are cured by cauterization is not convenient always, and pause that consequence.
And the cause is not good then that you do as they do for it, because cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexity and dries up the moisture which is the cause why pains come.
But however cauterization superfluous over medicine because of its value and the goodness of its operation and the greatness of its Lord's power.
And it is possible that the malady return at any hour of time, according to the complexity of the malady and the location of the malady and the goodness of it, and because of this, it is prepared in its body by the addition of superfluous things in it, and because of which it is obtained from it in its acquisition in food and semblantz of those causes; but that the malady for which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady in a member of few superfluous things and moisture, then cauterization of tooth for pain and resembling that one, it is possible that in him does not return that pain, but comes in small.
And however the popular speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a foolish speech, not to those who understand it, because they believe that it is a cure which profits by medicine or by another cause; but that the speech is right to you, children, because I will explain why.
And the cause is opposite to that; and my intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not profit, and at the end of the cause we administer cauterization, and it profits to him. And therefore I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the speech which the popular and foolish people understand.
And they say that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and do not say this only because of the equality of gold and its smallness; and from this it is known to you that it is a popular saying.
And they say that the place of cauterization does not cause pain, if it is not completely good, because I have seen and attracted that this does not cause pain to that one but to another; and cauterization with gold is good and better than cauterization with iron, which they say; but when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not known to you, because it is made by the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive a cut; and if you place over it an ignition it creates the gold to the fire, and possibly in the fire some scales from which the artifice cuts himself because of the occupation of this one.
And by the way, it is necessary to make cauterization with iron very lightly and then carefully in the order of operation.
And I have ordered this chapter in cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those within the chapters that suit you best for so that you ask what you want of them.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on moisture and coldness on the servel accident of which two causes; so is a cause of soda and many fluxes of rheumatic, called corss, from the head to the branches of the neck flowing, and many sleeping, and pain of teeth and the golaeryo, and generally of all diseases that are caused by coldness; then, in a way similar to those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that first you command the malady that it be evacuated by medicine lacative, exposing the head, for three or four nights, according to what you require from the goodness of the malady and the age of it and its costume.
And then order him to shave his head with a razor, and then let that person sit between your legs on a bench and place his hands over the feet of his Lord.
And then pause the cut from your palm near the hand on the cut of the nose between the branches of his lord. But however, when the young man says of his place it has come, then mark that place by trying, and order to make cauterization with olive oil of which this is the form:
And then let that sit on the place carefully as it descends, by which the hand of the young man is tightly pressed little by little, and you turn that person.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see any quantity of hair already falling, as well as the quantity of gravel that falls from it, then raise your hand again; and if not return your hand to him with iron, with another from it, if it is cold, within which I have said to you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve that person on the place and leave that for three days.
And then let that sit in the fire's bed covered with a cloth and leave that within which is destroyed the scale of the fire. And then treat the place with a four-fold bitter medicine within which be cured.
And it was said that when the Roman plague broke out, so much better was the harvest, because it is better and more fruitful.
And some of them said that the cord within the bone should be cauterized, and cautery should be placed within so that a small part of the bone's tissue is burned.
Then let water be poured that is close to the bone, and then let it be cured.
And others said that the cautery should reach the back, inside the bone so that it doesn't break through, and this is the form of small surgery. They recommend exhaling the vapors from above that spot.
And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then let it be cured within so that it hardens.
I do not see these two types of cauterization in all places, but in some cases out of fear; and this one, in my opinion, is better to save when it is necessary because the head is a central part for the continuity of life in the whole body, and more so when the patient' head is of frail nature.
And the first type of cauterization is better saved and more useful to me; and from that, I choose this work to save life.
Second.
Of the head cauterization.
When in the whole head chronic and prolonged pain occurs due to water in the skull, and it is used with scalpel and scythes and poultices and plasters and compresses and balms, and more so if the head has already been cauterized with a cauterizer that was not effective for some reason, then consider that since the patient' head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not pleasant and causes a great pain, then let another cauterization be performed after a short time. Then let that one be cauterized on the edge of his hairline with cautery within so that the cord is broken. Then cut the cord and expose a small amount of bone where we have counted and cauterize that one with a cauterizer in the back of the head at the location called "vas," — and this is the spot where wind is felt. And rejoice in your healing, and do not expose the bone because the water causes great pain that is different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And let this cauterization be performed in its location, because, as we have said, the cauterization with which the hairline of the head and the occiput are treated is subtler cauterization than that with which the back of the head is treated; and this is the form.
Third.
Of cauterization for emigre.
When pain in the edge of the head is hard, or there is pain inside the ear, then wash the head with medicine, and administer another treatment, which I have described in the causes of headaches; and if it does not benefit, then cauterize it in two ways: either with burning medicine, or with iron.
Perhaps cauterizing with burning medicine is better than taking a dolent of ale, and scraping that one and cleaning the ends from both sides. Then cut the area of pain in the temple with a sharp scalpel within so that the cord is hidden.
Then tighten it on the affected area with a strong constriction, and leave it for three hours; then dip the area in oil, and leave the plague for two or three days, and then place it under water within the location where the pain is felt.
Then let that one be cured with ointment so that it heals.
And if you want, there are some medicines described in the second book of burning medicines.
Perhaps cauterizing with iron according to this method:
And it is called a small peg, because the head is thus shaped like a peg and there is a small curve in its middle; and in the middle of it is a slight prominence.
Then place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand away from it — so that the iron does not burn your hand — and move the small piece of iron slowly over the area.
And if the amount of the liquid that is absorbed by the tissue of the cord is thus much, and then raise your hand away from it so that the artery does not burn, which is left, so that there is no flow of blood.
Then dip the cord in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then dip the area at the edge slightly with oil, and let that one be cured with ointment so that it heals.
And if you see this, cauterize the end of the knife according to cauterization and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-traditional emigre.
Fourth.
Of cauterization for an ancient emigre.
When you treat an emigre with water described in the previous treatment and in the division of headaches, and if that treatment does not benefit, and sometimes because of the headache caused by water, which we have said to be treated with a scalpel cauterization so that it whitens, because it indicates on the area of pain according to its length from which the majority of it comes, or where it is; then pause your hand for a moment and tighten it within a strong constriction, and place the tip of a sharp knife on fire until it becomes white-hot, and then apply it to the affected area so that it burns.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is moved during mastication, and that the tongue is not burned and the nerves are not damaged, and that it does not become spasm.
And if it is about the care and safety of the flow of blood from the artery that is being cut off, for in the cutting of it is fear, and more so when you do not know what water is used and you are not careful and attentive; then let the operation begin on the patient at the beginning.
And I come to the memory of the accident of blood flow from the artery according to his way, in his location of this freedom.
If this headache does not benefit from that cauterization and the cord of the emigre is tolerable, then let that one be cauterized in the middle of the head according to what we have described, and cure the plague so that it heals.
And if you see this, administer the cauterization which we have described in the head of stretching the artery with two knives, and this is the best cauterization and more so.
Fifth.
Of cauterization for ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear due to scratching and it does not benefit from the other treatment that we have described in the division of causes, then burn the cauterization, and this is the one which has no name, and this is its form:
Then place the tip of the knife or iron on the edge of the ear, and move it in a circular motion, or around the whole ear if the pain is there; or place it on one side of the ear and then move it to the other side if the pain is on that side. Alonge them, little by little, the cauterization of the ear lobe, so as not to make him lose his balance by trying the place with a touch.
And if the cauterization of the points is done on the entire ear lobe, and those are already healed, and the places are then cleaned so that they are healthy.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization of torture.
Torture which is cured and has not to do with the spices that come through the blood, according to what we have said in the division of the maltitudes.
Avoid cauterization of the spice which comes forth from drought or from a nerve spasm.
When you cure that kind of torture with jerrings and capipurgies and gargles, and do not confirm your cure, then three cauterizations are to be done: the first on the lobe of the ear, the second on a small piece of skin from the temple, and the third on the junction of two lips.
And pause the small cauterization on the opposite side of the male malady, for softening does not happen except in that part which is healthy.
And the shape of the cauterization is that you cauterize it on the right side of the lobe of the ear, placing a small piece over the top of the head, and in the temple, which is according to the length of the said piece, and pause your hand so that the quantity of the spice of the blood comes out.
This is the shape of the cauterization, and it is special with the knife, the shape of which is placed in front of the table. But even more careful is it that he put a little of the spice on the feet, and that he does not use too much useless grace.
Then return the place to where it was before being cut, so that it is healthy.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have said that you do not confirm your cure on the patient who has no fever, then four cauterizations are to be done: on all the hair of his head; and on the place where the pulse was before, as we have said; and in the neck. And the way of doing the cauterization is done according to what has been said.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and then follow; and be cleaned with water that you have cut.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization of oblivion caused by flame.
Then give the patient in the beginning jerrings big and pills with a strong voice.
Then return the head of the patient completely, and place it on the neck of him with the paste described in the treatise of pastes.
Then pause some of them, for that is a way of cauterization. And put it according to that measure which I have already said.
And so if by those it is healthy; and otherwise, then do three cauterizations on the last part of his head, which are separated from the last part of the top within the last part of the head. And between each cauterization the thickness of the spice, and return the cauterization with water that has been done.
And if the patient is not thirsty and accepts water, then do the cauterization in the middle; and if you find that there is more addition, then cauterize it on both sides of the head.
Then return the place to where it is healthy; and if the cauterization is olive according to what has been said before.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Then you process in the softening of the head with jerrings and water that we have said; and return the head to the patient, and do the cauterization in the middle of the head, and on all sides of it, and on the last part of it, and on the two joints.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of three people and the patients are tolerant and the malady is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the joints of the legs, and afterwards return your hand so that the spice comes out by the blood. Then return the place to where it is healthy, and this be cauterization olive.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not cauterized to the epileptic one, but that epilepsy is caused by blood.
And then return the brain of him completely at the beginning, and with another cure that we have said in the division when the malady is great and the patient is tolerant of the experience of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gargles and mastication to him in front of water for three days, with a good flavor of food.
Then return the head of the child completely, and do the cauterization in the middle of the head according to the way that we have said before, and another on the top of him, and on each side of his head, and cauterize it on all sides. And if the malady is strong and the patient is tolerant, then cauterize it with the ways that I have said, in having paralysis and softening of the body on the joints of the neck and the joints of the legs.
And do cauterization olive according to what has been said before.
But if the patient is a child, then pause the small cauterization according to this way.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and gross flame, then cauterize it with the ways that I have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess of declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him water that softens the brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
Then return the head of the patient completely, and place it with a good way on the circle, and return that place to where it was before in the middle of the head.
And the patient be sixty years old, and is held completely.
Then pause the linen; and it is more dignifying of a lamb's skin. And bake it by fire with moderate heat, according to what it suffers when it is hot in the middle. Then return that place to where it was before on the circle of him, and leave it so that it is cooled down.
And give the patient in a week once, by water that he has said to him; or if you wish, cauterize it with small points according to what we have said before, and this is the way of doing the cauterization which softens the brain with equality: this is the special cauterization that moistens the brain.
Then return that place to where it was before in the color of a border or in the shades of yellow and green.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization of descending water in the vein.
When you have said that the beginning of water in the vein is declared by the senses that I have said in the division, then start and give to the patient water that softens his head, and preserve that from all humors.
And put this sweetener in a bath of milk for several days.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize the spot where he will cut his hair; and cauterize twice on both temples if it is the beginning of a fever in two holes, or once on one temple if it is the beginning of water in a hole.
Cut all the veins and arterioles that remain with the blade, and let the cauterization be in the length in the latitude of the temples.
And beware of flow of blood when he is cauterized; and if you see any flow of blood from him, stop it with some medicine, which is at your possible.
Then come with wisdom that is in the extraction of arterioles and in the disappearance of those and the caution against flow of blood.
And some times he is cauterized in the neck with two bones pointed out by two cauterizations.
Chapter XIII.
Of the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old, flowing through the veins and arteries that go out to the manifest part of the head, and it is seen that they are superfluitatz, then cauterize with a knife what we have told in the chapter on the beginning of water, touching on the middle spot of the head, and on both temples, and on the neck between two bones. And if you feel a lack of addition, then cauterize on the whole length of the cheekbone on the edge of the brow with a small cauterization.
Chapter XIV.
Of the Cauterization of the Odor of the Nose.
When you treat the patient with water, which we have said in the division, and do not profit from your treatment, then prepare and give to him three cups of drink; and then shave his head, and cauterize with a half-moon shape. Then cauterize on the edge of the brow with a small clavus, with two cauterizations on both eyebrows, next to the hair.
And beware of the arceria that you do not set it on fire.
And of the cauterization with a small clavus, this is the form:
Chapter XV.
Of Cauterization to Soften the Eyelids of the Eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize it with a small cauterization in the shape of a moon; and this is the form of it:
And if you want to, cauterize on both eyebrows a small amount with two cauterizations from end to end, and let them be extended from the temples. Let the length of each cauterization be according to the quantity of the brow.
And do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, more according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is dried up.
Chapter XVI.
Of Cauterization to the Eyelid of the Eye When the Hair Turns White and the Hand Holds the Eye.
When the hair of the eye turns white in its inner part, so that it pokes the eye, then cauterize it according to two ways: either with fire or with burning medicine.
If it is a cauterization of fire, command the patient to look forward, so that his hair does not burn, until it grows out and falls off; and if he holds his head with a cloth, then your hand should be above, so that the hair does not come into contact with the cloth.
Then let the hair grow out and fall off, so that they are not caught; then place the patient's head in the third position, and put your hand on his brow with a signet, which is according to the shape of a fowl of death, and this is the beginning of the signet.
Then put it in a bag of wool or in a paste of pigeons on the head.
Then light the cauterization, and this is the form of it:
Then cauterize according to the figure that you have drawn, little by little, until the surface of the hair is burned, so that it looks like a sheet of moss, completely burned.
The signet of health of the work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the hair of the patient already lifted by the puncture of the head.
Then lift up your hand and place it on the bag for three days, and then open it and look at the content, that it may be well-made. Then treat that with ointment, so that it is healed.
But if it returns because of the hair, then treat it again with fire first; and if it is returned because of the eyelid being softened, then treat it again with a cauterization, which we have said above.
But if the hair is under the eyelid, then cauterize it until it rises to its natural place and is covered, so that the hair does not poke the eye.
But the cauterization with burning medicine is this: command the patient to look forward, so that his hair does not burn, until it grows out and falls off; then let him hold a cloth over his head, and make a signet of a sheet of moss, which we have said above.
Then take a sharp knife, and remove the cause with a quick stroke. I. Mix those causes together, and make a paste of them, so that it is not dried up; then spread the paste on the cloth, which we have said above, with the shape of a sheet of moss, and place it on the patient' side; and put the patient' head in the third position, and open the hair.
Then place the medicine on it, and press it a little, so that the patient does not feel the taste of the medicine, because its taste is in fire.
Then when the patient perceives that the medicine has a bitter taste, then let him leave the medicine and take it again by the third side; then when the taste of fire or cutting stops, then wash the head with water; and then consider if the eyelid has been raised already, which is good, or if it has fallen back, which is bad; and if it has fallen back because the medicine has dried up, then your operation is ruined and the hair is damaged.
Then put it on the bag for safety, so that the hair is not caught; then treat it with ointment of oil or water, so that it is healed.
And you must guard your operation with careful watchfulness, so that the medicine does not fall on the head; and if the eyelid is softened by any cause because of the hair, then treat it again with the medicine on the spot where the eyelid is softened, and as soon as it begins to work, then completely, until it is healed.
And this is the form of a sheet of moss.
The eyes of men are different in size and shape; and therefore your compression should be according to each eye.
Do not hide the path of the cure for him who studies this craft.
Chapter XVII. De la contraccio de les palpebres.
On cauterization of the fistula that is in the lacrimal canal of the eye.
When you treat the fistula that is in the lacrimal canal of the eye, and do not refer to your own technique, then command the patient to hold his head still on top, and have a minister hold it from behind in such a way that he does not move or shake his head.
Then apply some hot wax or a poultice made of wool on top of the eye.
Then light the cauterization, this is the form:
The one that is curved, thus made of a cane or a stick of wood, from one end of which the cauterization is applied.
And if you see, then let it penetrate to the other end. And if you wish, then do so with difficulty.
However, the curved one is better for the work.
Then press on the fistula if it is open, and draw out its liquid and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then apply the cauterization that is well lit on top of the eye, and at the same time make a small cut in the corner of the eye, so that the hand or the patient does not move, and the cauterization is applied to the gray part of the eye and let it corrode.
And thus, if at the beginning of the eye cauterization it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice, as needed, and leave it alone for three days, and then apply the ointment that is dried up around it so that it heals.
However, if after eleven days it is not healed, then apply the acute corrosive medicine inside so that the bone is uncovered and scrape it according to what your manual says in the patient's chapter.
And another way of treating a fistula, which some earlier writers said: Enter into the place of the fistula and cut it open, and then apply to that crack that is very small in shape: And pour in that quantity of molten lead; and let your hand be well held back, so that the lead does not reach the eye of the patient; and then apply hot wax on top of the patient' s eye where the fistula is, as the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is healed with water that we have mentioned in the cauterization and cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer trauma through the nose and reduce the fistula to its base according to what comes out in its place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cauterization of a wound with fire.
Moles that appear as cracks on the lips, and mostly on children' s lips.
So, when you treat those cracks with water that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not apply your cure, then light the small knife according to this form that it burns:
The cavity of the nose according to the subtility of a blade.
Then return that knife with precision into those cracks so that the cauterization reaches the base of the cracks.
Then treat it with cerotine so that it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an abscess that bursts, and then it is broken, and then it is pushed back, and then it is burned with fire, and your hand is applied to it, so that the burning fire reaches the base of the abscess, and then you treat it with water that we have mentioned in the cure, then apply hot wax on top of the abscess, and let it burn; and then, if there is any pus left, then light the fire a little more; and then treat it as mentioned above for healing.
And if the healing has taken place and it is healed, it is good; and if not, then uncover the place and burn the bone corrupted according to what your manual says in the patient' s chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then treat those with medicines and do not apply your own technique, then return the patient' s head to the top, and light the cauterization in the form that is mentioned above, and quickly insert it into the tooth; and let the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth from below.
Then remove your hand, and repeat the cauterization a few times according to what you wish.
Then make the patient' s mouth drink saltwater and keep it for an hour, then rinse that out, as the loose tooth is stabilized and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupting moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is caused by cold or heat, or it does not respond to your medicine, then apply any of the following two ways: cauterize at the root of the tooth with cow's milk or cauterize with fire.
Cauterization with border is that you take cow' s milk and heat it up, then apply that hot milk to the root of the tooth, and then wrap it in a cloth over the end of the tooth, and quickly dip the wrapped tooth into the heated milk, and let that hot milk cool down on top of the painful tooth until it is cooled down.
Then repeat that application several times until the heat of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you see, then dip a hair or cloth into the heated border and apply it to the tooth, and then apply hot milk to that, and then let the heated border reach the base of the tooth' s cavity.
However, the cauterization with fire is that you attend to the liquid of milk or iron, and that it is in the center of the tooth and the sharpness of fire does not reach the patient' s mouth.
Then light the cauterization in the form mentioned above, and then apply it to the tooth, and let your hand be well held back so that the cauterization does not reach the patient' s mouth; and then, if necessary, repeat it a few times, as the pain persists for some time.
Then, because of the impression that that patient' s mouth takes from the hot border and is held for an hour, then rinse it out; and this is the form of the cauterization.
Cauterize at any extreme point that you can see.
This is the form of the tube:
Chapter XXII.
On the cauterization of an exostosis.
When the exostosis is made of slimy fluid and viscous fluids that do not respond to medicines, and you see its digestion easily by the sight, then light the cauterization in a curved form as mentioned above; having two open ends, so that the smoke of fire reaches one end, and apply that smoke to the abscess once, and if you wish to, from another end; then let it cool down on top of the abscess until it stops burning.
Here is the translation of the text:
"And then clean that wound and bandage and wrap it up until it heals."
Chapter III.
On the Cauterization of Wounds and Constriction of Arteries.
When the moisture comes over the chest of the patient, and mostly when the air is cold, then it should be made to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place where the wound is located.
And be careful not to cause the cauterization to reach the chest or to burn the patient's skin with the cauldron, but only a little bit."
"And then cauterize that other wound with another cauterizer starting from the base of the neck at the last vertebra." The cauldron should be made in the way described above.
"And then clean that wound that came before it until it heals."
Chapter XXIV.
On the Cauterization of Lung Malaise and Coughing.
When the cough and lung malady are caused by cold humors, and there is no fever or consumption, but it is an old disease, then cauterize that wound twice on the rib cage in the areas where it is located, and on the middle of the foot between two breasts; and the cauldron should be made in the way described above."
If you want, you can make your cauterization with a pointed instrument, the shape of which you apply to the point where the pain is in the ears."
Make points within those areas, and then clean that wound that came before it until it heals."
And so be the cauterization, having three rakes, because cauterization is made in this way: according to this form, you can make three cauterizations:"
Chapter XXV.
On the Cauterization of Itching that is on the scalp.
When the scalp is detached by cause of lubricous moisture and does not return in its place within an hour, then reduce the detachment first, and then reverse the patient' head on its back or on its side; and lift up the hair that is on the sides towards the top of the scalp with your right hand, if the joint is dislocated at the sides, and with your left hand, if it is dislocated at the top.
"And then make two rakes for the cauterization, and this is the way to do it:"
"And then cauterize the hair that is on either side within, so that it reaches to the other side of the scalp; and this is the figure of cauterization:
"In some cases, it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason, the rakes are made."
"Then pause over the cauldron for three days, and then apply the patient' hand to rest, and let the member not be bothered at all until it is healed."
If the detachment is at the sides and it is fixed, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed or sharp instrument, because the joint is confirmed to be dislocated, and the moisture is running, and the patient' hair is healed."
Chapter XXVI.
On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
When the stomach comes to the surface of the body and there are moisture entering it from its formation, and if you continue with your treatment methods and do not confirm, then it should be made that the patient is on his back, and spread your hands and your cushions, and then cauterize that wound three times: one rake of a finger on the foot according to the amount of a thumb, and two rakes on either side of the rake, within the triangle shape; and extend between those that are not adjusted to make them stronger."
And if the depth of the cauldron is according to the amount of two-thirds of the thickness of the hair."
"And be the figure of the cauldron according to this form, and if you want, cauterize with a large cauldron in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is the shape of a circle according to this form:"
"And then cauterize the stomach with a pointed instrument according to the amount that you want, and then clean that wound; and then clean that wound that came before it until it heals."
Chapter XXVII.
On the Cauterization of a Fetus' Death.
When the fetus' pain is caused by cold, or moisture, or heavy wind within its normal formation, and if it does not confirm to you, then it should be made that the patient is on his back, and spread your hands over it, and then clean that wound with water that we have mentioned, and do not confirm to it; then cauterize that wound three times according to this form, and this amount is written on the fetus' left side from the shoulders, and then let go of the patient' head."
"And be the space between each rake according to the amount of a thumb, and be the cauldron according to the length of the right side."
Do not press your hand on it during cauterization."
"And if the amount of water that has been added is according to the amount of half of the thickness of the hair, and it is not adjusted again; and if the patient is lying on his back; and if he is not sitting up, then let him lie down, which has already extended its cushions, and raise his shoulders."
You can make these rakes with a sharp or sharp instrument, and it is possible for you to cauterize these rakes with caution and wisdom in the art."
And be careful not to do too much cauterization, and let the thickness of all the hair be added so that it reaches all over the body, because the hair here is fine; and know how to clean."
Chapter XXVIII.
On Perforating an Abscess in the Fetus by Cauteur.
When there is an excites or abscess in the fetus, and you want to know if it is in the fetus' flesh or in its membrane, then if it is in the fetus' flesh, the patient will have pain that increases with its growth."
If it is in the fetus' membrane, then the pain will become very severe and will fatigue your treatments."
Then turn the patient on its back, and then identify the location of the abscess; and then clean that wound with water, and then apply the cauldron that has been made into strands according to the way described above in another page." "And then cauterize that wound with a sharp cauldron and clean it so that all the hair is removed, and let it come out until it heals."
"Then clean those other wounds with this treatment until they heal."
However, I will use that method of cauterization in the text from which this form of cauterization is extended, and in addition to it, there are some bad humors that have been known; however, I will leave those behind that need it, but I will prefer this."
Chapter .xxix.
On Wound-Healing.
They said that the small cauterizer of the skin grafts for plauresi (wound-healing) is a good one to use in this way, and it should be a small one, long and thin, which can be found, and of the right thickness.
And submerge that in oil and then hold it to the fire, and cauterize with a small cautery at that spot which is between the continuation of the furcula and the collar; and with two small cauterizes leave one slightly declining at the part where the beard is left, and with two small cauterizes at that spot which is declining between the fifth rib and the ilium, slightly declining at the parts behind; and with another cautery at that spot which is between the two thighs, and with three cauterizes at the spots behind; and with one cautery at that spot which is between the two shoulders, and with two small cauterizes at the sides of the thigh, leave the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And do not cover that hand with a glove, but rather in the open air of the gloved hand.
And they said also that some men who use a cauterizer of iron resembling a ray and fiery should place that in that spot which is between the ribs, until we come to that apoplexy and it is completely healed away; and so I have said before at the apoplexy of the foot.
But in this piercing with a cauterizer there is no fear, because very often it happens at that spot which is a fistula to which there is no healing;
Chapter.xxx.
On Wound-Healing.
When you heal the badness of the wound with water which we have said about healing in the division and do not confer your healing, then cauterize it three times or four times according to the length of the wound according to the shape of the cauterizes of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cauterize the thickness of a finger or a little less, and the way of the cauterize is the way which we have said about the cauterize of the foot equally.
And do not cover that hand with a glove, and the patient be sitting on his own two feet.
And another way of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cauterize having two points, which causes we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the glove which is in the edge of the wound the six fingers of the left hand without touching the patient's skin.
And be your elevation which is according to the length of the body, so that may be made cauterizes according to the thickness of the body.
And then enter between the two points, ignite quickly in that spot which is within those that penetrate the glove from the other side.
Then remove the cauterize; and there are four cauterizes then made.
And if you see, cauterize with a cauterize having three points.
Then you heal the cauterize which has been put on that spot which had been burned by fire because it is more certain than other causes precede in the healing.
Chapter.xxxi.
On Wound-Healing from Burning.
A cauterize is not made in burning, but rather it is made in four ways properly speaking.
When you heal the burn with the ways of healing which we have said in the division and do not confer your healing, then cover that burn with a cloth; and make a cauterize on the four sides of the cloth and a cauterize over the stomach, and another cauterize over the thigh, and another over the wound, and two cauterizes between the two shoulders, and one cauterize on the right side of the leg, and another cauterize over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterize be proportionate to the thickness of the glove.
Then leave the cauterize on top so that you get a long-lasting bruise.
And you do not evacuate the patient' healing with water which covers for that spot so that those two entencios are added to it, and the third one is spun away by the helping healing.
The form of the cauterize on which is cauterized the belly be pointed according to that shape of that which has been cauterized before, and that with which is cauterized the two sides be olivared according to that which has been cauterized before its shape.
Chapter.xxxii.
On Foot-Healing and Wound-Healing from the Toes.
When the toes are blistered and filled with clear water, cover that toe with a cloth; and do not twist it, because the clear water will ooze out. Then raise your hand to the height of the cauterize and do not twist it back again, because the clear water will drip.
This is the form of the cauterize: And make two cauterizes on the two toes, and in each toe be made a cauterize at the tip of the cauterize-knife. And be the cauterize according to the length of the toe: one at the top and another below the middle part of the toe, and above each toe two cauterizes.
Then leave the wound healing for a long time because no water will ooze out from it.
And heal that according to those causes which we have said.
Chapter.xxxiii.
On Abdominal Wound-Healing.
When the abdominal wound is caused by burning and wetness which melts the insides, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which is in the stomach and intestines, and heal with water in the ways of healing and do not confer your healing, and sometimes the patient suffers a cauterize of the exhibiting virtue; then cauterize that with a large cauterize on the top part of the stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with a large cauterize on the circle and four cauterizes in the circuit of the navel, with a sharp cauterize; and with a large cauterize on the lower parts, or with two cauterizes.
And if the patient tolerates abundant moisture and water, then cauterize that on the top of the navel and on the intestines, and firmly tighten three cauterizes to the stomach and one between the two loins; because this is a perfect healing which is not deficient in any way, and from which there is no return.
Chapter.xxxiv.
On Healing of Old Hemorrhoids.
When the nature of the disease is of old hemorrhoids or a humor of grossness that leaks or of corrupted moisture, they are healed with water which we have said in the division and do not confer your healing, then cauterize with three cauterizes on the top part which is between the two shoulders and at the sides of the neck, and one cauterize on the lower part; and cut off the two extremities, because they are small.
And if you think that the stomach of the patient is swollen and his food is not digested, and the face of the patient sometimes blistered, then cauterize that on the stomach with a large cauterize according to what has preceded; and one cauterize on the thigh, and another on the wound of the patient between two cauterizes; leave those cauterizes for some time, and heal that which is inside.
Chapter .35
Of cauterization and the removal of their blindness.
When you remove athma, then let your fire for the cautery be ready. Then bring the fire into that athma which you have removed, and place your hand over it so that the fire can reach the opening of the vein from which comes the blood to the heart.
And make one or two cuts, since the cuts are many, then cauterize each one according to what we have counted, and quickly treat those that you have cut with oil within so that it is healed.
And if you cauterize a large cautery on the skin, then it heals more quickly.
Chapter 36
Of cauterization of the fistulas that are made in nature during the separation of the legs.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by the water, then heal it with cautery.
Then when any vein opens up in nature during the separation of the legs, and it is old, correct it with fire and wet corrupt things, and then put on oil that is fitting for the aforementioned subtle attempt, and remove the quantity of its depth from the front that is mentioned above.
Then light the cautery that resembles fire. And place the lit cautery on this vein, and according to the quantity in which it is mixed with the attempt.
And repeat over that cautery within so that those bodies are burned up one time or two or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the channel of the bladder or the channel of the intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not pour water down there unless it is in a fleshly place and you think that it does not penetrate.
And quickly treat the area so that it is healed.
And if the place is sealed and you have removed the matter from it, and such has stayed for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the matter has not remained with it, then know that it is penetrating or it is corrupting it in the center of its leg, or water from those causes will come about which will bring remembrance to its place.
Chapter 37
Of cauterization of the skin.
When the skin itches due to water or rough wind, and because of this the patient becomes impatient, then know that you should cauterize it on the skin with a sharp nail from which remembrance can be taken.
And strongly cauterize it on the second with a small piece of string, so that three small cauterization lines will come out, and then heal more quickly.
Chapter 38
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes inflamed and soft due to water and moisture so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it in the front with a small piece of string above the bladder, where the hair of the perineum begins, and cauterize it on the right with one cautery and on the left with another.
And make the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the hair in the place; and cauterize it with one cautery in the front lower part of the two, or with two cauterization if necessary.
And make a sharp cautery as it is processed.
Chapter 39
Of cauterization of the head.
When there is water and moisture on the head, and because of this, there is a prevention of conception, and the women's menstrual periods are disrupted, and pain arises due to the movement of their hair, then know that the place should be cauterized with three cauterization lines in the circle of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and on the front lower part of the two, or two cauterization lines, and make the final cautery sharp.
Chapter 40
Of cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When the moisture is viscous and moistened in the channel of the ankle, and when the swelling of its place is caused by the movement of its blood, and the sign is that the cushion is prolonged on the other when compared to it. And the dislocated place is turned in it.
Then place the patient's leg in such a way that you can turn it with cautery on the outside of the ankle, and make a circle around it, as you will have understood from the attempt made in the dislocated place, so that the outside falls on its own place.
And make the cautery with which the form precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not to your liking, then cauterize it with three small cauterization lines, and with the olive cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the sharpness of the whole wound; and quickly treat that which is inside so that it is healed.
Chapter 41
Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain arises in the ankle joint, and it is caused by water and roughness, then wash the patient with water that we have mentioned, and if it is not effective, then know that the patient has a thick humor; and then cauterize it.
And the way of cauterizing in that place is according to two ways: either cauterize with burning medicine or cauterize with fire.
And the second is that you cauterize it on the outside of the leg with three triangular cauterization lines according to this shape, and make them deep. And space between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of that one; and if the olive or large cautery is used.
A few more times is the cautery over the middle place on top of the ankle so that it is four cauterization lines.
And if you wish, then cauterize with a large circle that precedes the shape in the dislocation of the ankle joint, and the one which is a large circle, and burn the sharpness of the whole wound.
This is the way to cauterize sciatica when pain adheres to the ankle and is not extended within the cushion.
And if it is extended within the cushion, then cauterize it with two cauterization lines on the outside of the cushion over the place where the leg joins that is the pain; and a cautery on the shin bone for four small ones, slightly forward from the center.
And if the cautery is sharp, and make the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the sharpness of the wound.
And if the patient becomes aware that the pain is extended within the joint, then cauterize it where he feels the pain with three or four points, or more if necessary, using a sharp cautery.
And if the patient becomes aware that the pain is on the outside of the leg near the shin bone, then cauterize it where he feels the pain with a sharp cautery.
And beware of cauterizing in such a way that you burn the nerves or cause great damage, and let it be known to you whether this cautery is beneficial or harmful; and let it not be done without your knowledge.
You have already seen one of those which I cauterized on the shin bone and ended in cauterization, and the fire was heated within so that the swelling became small; and the fire pierced through it all. And there came a great relief from the belly, and so it brought death.
And if the pain is in two parts then cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said in the cauterization of water cauterize this, which is this way: make a circle of iron which its circuit is most of a palm; and it should be at its orifice according to the thickness of a date bone or half a palm.
And inside that circle there is another third part; and the space which is between them is the quantity of the nail of the hand; and these circles should be open from both sides; and the length of those hooks should be a nail or two, and make in those margins of iron properly fitted into the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then set fire to the iron inside that it burns and gives off sparks, and put it on the half of the water, the hernia placed over its edge. And then cauterize this hand three times in one way.
Then let that rest for three days; then apply the plaster to the wound and leave the poultice on for seven days; and then cure this hand with fire within.
Albucasis says: O son, of this kind of cauterization we have used little for the sake of keeping watch over it, and few have found those who look upon it.
More of these iron cauterizations were applied to him who suffered them, and he turned his attention away from it.
More of the medical cauterizations with iron hooks are that you make two circles, armed with a hook in which to put the nail of the hand; and let the length of the part be two nails or more than that.
And if the space between them is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they should be open from above and below, and let them contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
Then place over the half of the water the hernia placed on its edge, and press your hand upon the other half; and take a tail of water between both circles, and the quality of that water is little fire little by little, until you have it for an hour, and let the patient suffer the pain and the burning of it — since this caused pain as when there is fire — until the pain stops.
Then raise your hand up to the instrument and wash the tail of water off all the water of the foot with two-part water.
Then let that rest for three days and leave the plaster on until the burning has subsided, and let it run off with water; this is better in the end.
Then cure that hand with fire within so that it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the crotch or the thigh, then make the cauterization in the way that it contains water according to how it was done on the half of the foot.
And this is the way of tail water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take alkali and two parts of the other, half a part from one side, and mix them with a little water; and break the half of it into a new wave, and let the part which was broken come together with that which is whole, according to the quantity which enters it.
Then break the other half into a new wave that comes together with it, and get it on top of the alkali and the strong water of two parts which you mixed, and then let you compress those by hand from above, and leave the wave which sends down the sharp water from the part which was broken.
Then adjust all that water, and get it on another strong water and other alkali, since it sharpens that which is broken, the same way as fire sharpens; this is administered in small doses of medicine and in the cauterization of the other members, because the operation is like fire.
And thus from medicines some of which are cauterized broad, as well as the teazig and melannic and strong water with salt added to it so that they are mixed together.
And Guaglia reported about a man of old age the operation and the cure with which he was cured of foot pain and sciatica, and he said that there is no need for another cure, and that he was healed by one dose as well; since this is very effective treatment, because it was a strong medicine already known to him.
And it is that it be taken with a certain amount of wine, and if it does not turn green, then a little fig is taken; and it is mixed three times with a little salt and placed on the foot in which the pain is, or in the crotch or thigh, and let it lie.
Then leave it for three hours, or for the quantity which the patient feels pain.
Then put that in water, and then when the body of the patient is warm, put that into the sun, since the pain stops and it is healed.
And you should know that there is no need for any kind of cauterization with these medicines except to remove the contents of the body.
More of Escorides says that when the vein is cut with a goat's foot, it is better to apply oil; and this cauterization is done with this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the feet of the foot or between the joints.
Then take a dry goat' s foot and ignite it with fire until it is red-hot, and then place it on the wool, and leave it until it is cooled down. Then repeat this water, and do not stop doing so until the sensation of pain reaches all parts of the foot.
And this way of cauterizing is called cow's cauterization.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the Cauterization for Two types of Pain.
Some times the pain is in two parts due to two causes, because of the obstruction or the piercing or the excess evacuation, and because of those which resemble them, by the infusion of rubbing material and moisture.
And cauterization does not occur except in this single specialty which is done by the infusion of rubbing material.
Then it is done by the excess evacuation of the patient with pills that resemble them, which are made on both sides of the foot in three lines according to its width; since there are more or fewer cauterizations according to the quantity which comes out of the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the water.
Then let cauterization be done with a sharp point.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauterizations or four, the fourth being a middle one, according to this method:
Chapter LXIII.
Of the Cauterization at the Beginning of Gilbosity.
Here comes the first sentence to translate:
And I see in the last spine of the back and the hips that it has already begun to rise over the others.
And when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that cautery that is round according to this shape: so that the cautery takes up all of the spine's part evenly.
And if you want, cauterize in the circumference of the spine with a pointed cautery two lines or three. Then the points are close to each other.
And then cure the area in which it is that we have said it can be healed with.
Keep in mind that the cautery is not administered in yellow skin that is made by nerve spasms.
Chapter .xliv.
On Gout and Joint Pain Treatment.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And then, if gout is cured of its cause with a way of treatment and does not remain painful, then remove the cauteries.
And it's because you cauterize that evacuation in the circumference of the foot's joint with a few cautery points.
And it is a cauterizing olive of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains push inwards towards the innermost or other joints, and when they are seen moving, then cauterize that on each innermost joint with three cautery points or four of all parts with this cauterizing olive.
And if you need those cautery points that these cauteries are to your use, then cauterize that and don't press too much on your hand with the cautery beforehand, only surrounding the spine of the thumb.
And if the pains push inwards towards the thumb and the second joint, then administer the cautery that we have said in the previous chapter.
And if the pains are only in one place, and it is called sugar, then make points in the circumference of the knuckle as it turns, making points in these two lines.
And if the pains remain in the feet, then make points on the circumference of the knuckles on each toe and on the top of the hand.
And if the pains push inwards towards the sides by the space between the legs or muscles, then cauterize all of them on each side.
And do not evacuate the malady of good rule and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good rule and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery, God helps it.
Chapter .xlv.
On Breaking Bones Treatment.
When a fracture occurs in the leg and the intestines are exposed before the hernia, and when it is beginning to move, then cover what you have said to the patient to stay in bed for a while, and that he uses lenitive measures so that the wound does not send from his abdomen.
Then follow the patient between your legs on his back, and order him to keep his back warm so that it doesn't break or show the intestine or the bowel.
Then return that to the small foot and hide it from the attempt of the fracture on the leg with a sign like a circle on the lower part of the spine that is divided into four parts.
Then light the cautery of which this is the form:
in which it is a red thing and gets shiny. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not protrude.
You have already opened the space between the patient’s thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then pause the cautery on that sign with your hand to the side where you can control it, and then return it to the place where you can get the leg’s bone in the middle of the back; and repeat it to another sign if you don't succeed in the first one within the spine.
Then observe wisely about the intestine’s evacuation during your cauterization, that you don't burn that intestine so that over the malady doesn't come to death or another great evil.
And you know that when you don't have the bone with the cautery, you do not perform your operation.
And cover that children’s cauterization is subtle according to their age and measure.
Then cure the place of the cauterization for three days on the border so that the fire’s scar remains.
Then cure that with the others in guenstiness within healing.
And the malady be present on the patient’s back for a hundred days within sealing the place and plague.
And cover that you pause the nutrition of it according to the length of time for the malady’s treatment which causes the patient’s stomach to move, and that the intestine doesn't burn outside due to the effort of healing.
Then when you want to take it away after a hundred days, then administer it properly, and keep it for another hundred days.
And it is a matter of work and replacement of food and drink, and of determined vigilance, because when this treatment is used with complete healing, God helps it.
And you order the treatment of breaks in other parts of the abdomen, and to begin it, and want them not to stop, then cauterize that break with a red cautery according to its quantity, and be that which is taken out of the spine also as the third part; then cure that with what we have said, and doesn'
And already others say that the first break is cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked by attempt:
And the line that goes for the thickness in the middle of the rupture is paused, and another line on top of it; then pause your hand with a nail, but the first cauterization is lighter and better.
Chapter .xliv.
On Twisting Treatment.
When it is twisted in the limbs by encasing or beating, and that pain persists for a long time and does not confer to the treatment with medicines, then you have to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And it is the cauterization of all limbs according to their size and age, and virtue and development, and location of twisting and pain.
Then if the first cauterization is good, it is so; otherwise, then repeat it on that part; for, usually, these pains are caused by member punctures at that limb which comes closer to the body, so that you have to achieve those with cauterizations where the malady is healed.
Chapter  .xlvii.
On Leprous Treatment.
The leprous spots are cured by a large amount of cauterization with great care if it is the leprous spot that is caused by fire’s decay and melancholy.
And then when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprous spot is caused by fire’s decay and sadness, then cure it with water that we have said in the division and don' t confound or fear about the malady which compromises all of the limb and whole composition of it, then cauterize that on top of the head at the middle place, and the second after them, leaving them behind; leaving them two in front and behind the end of the hair; and two on each side; and one behind, on the neck or server.
And last your hand with a little pressure on it until the bone is slightly injured, and the scarlets are moved away from it, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is relieved; and cauterize over the surface according to what is needed.
And if the leper has already spread over the patient's body and appears clearly, then cauterize those that we have said above; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and on two points under the mouth, and on two points behind the ears, and on two points at the base of the skull, and a large one on the top of the skull, and one on each shoulder blade, and two on each arm pit, and two over the muscles, and two over the tendrils of their feet; and cauterize all the joints of the limbs of the said parts and of the feet, and on each heel, and on the knuckles of the fingers.
And keep away from the nerves that are above the bone so that you do not burn those.
And some of them are cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the navel.
And you should know that the more you apply cauterization, the more it is healing and effective; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in cauterization, for his body has already been numb.
And as the members and joints vary, so too should the size of the cauterization according to what has come before with the instruments.
Then clean the cauterized areas with a mixture of egg white and salt, and apply the other treatment while it is still moist.
Chapter. XLVIII.
Of Stupor Cauterization.
When a limb is stunned or asleep and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize that stunned limb with the amount of cauterization that suits the size of the limb or the age of the person.
And let the small cauterization enter a little into the nitty-gritty of the matter. Then clean that with vinegar, while it is still moist, so that it heals.
And some of them are cauterized when the stunned limb moves to the limbs and joints, and to the spine, so that the nerves that carry it do not become stunned again, and the stupor is renewed.
More should not be done to this than what is known about the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the whole body in motion.
Chapter. XLI.
Of Cauterization for Morphed Albaras.
When the albaras is old and does not respond to any of the medicine enquirries, then you should cauterize that with a small amount of cauterization according to the nature of the matter within, so that the whiteness and color of it are changed, and the color of it is altered.
Then clean that with a mixture of egg white and lentils, with rozana oil and arnica leaves, and a little honey from the colts or from the yarrows, all mixed together, and bind it to the area while it is still moist so that it heals.
Chapter I.
Of Cauterization for Crankiness.
When the crankiness begins and you want to calm them down, then cauterize that with a circular cauterization in the path of their movement.
The wise said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in its own place; but I have not seen it, for I think that it is ulcered, and I have already seen it a few times.
It is more appropriate to cauterize it in its own path with a circle as we have said, or with a small amount of cauterization.
Chapter II.
Of Cauterization for Adultery.
When an adulterous person is delayed in maturity, and it is due to the excess of their desire, or their age makes them too old for procreation, or because of time, and you want to speed up their maturity; then cauterize it in its own path with a small amount of cauterization as a mark; and let it go, for it will mature quickly.
But if you want to pierce it with cauterization, then set the cauterization of that as its form: and pause it in the middle of the adulterous person where it penetrates.
And if the cauterization is placed in that spot to relieve the pain of the arm, then clean that with something that heals it.
Chapter II.
Of Cauterization for Corrosion.
Corrodent is walking corruption in the limb, which corrupts that as it eats dry wood with fire.
Then, if that corrosion is in a place where it suffers from cauterization with fire, then set a small amount of cauterization with sharp knife-like cauterization, and large amounts according to what is suitable for the spot where the corrosion occurs.
Then cauterize that completely from the beginning so that you eradicate all corruption and do not affect any other cause.
Then let it rest for three days, and apply a mixture of oil with herbs over the cauterized areas every third day until all the scars are completely eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
Then clean that with a carn-generating ointment.
But if after three days the flesh is born that does not corrupt, then stop applying cauterization to that which corrupts.
Corrosion is treated with some medicines at times because that is half the treatment for cauterization. But applying cauterization with fire is much more beneficial.
I have already said that the treatment for it is with acute medicine in the division, and so take that when you need it.
Chapter III.
Of Cauterization for Claws and the Rest of the Similar Features.
A few times the claw of the bad-tempered person comes out, which is a gross cause and a door, which makes that person leave; and cauterize it in two ways, first with fire, and then with water tail.
But cauterization with fire is what ignites the cauterization that resembles a flash of lightning, which is caused by iron in the amount that contains the claw from the beginning, and is of fine edges.
Then let that ignite on the claw, and turn your hand around with the cauterization in the path of the claw so that the cauterization reaches its depth. Then let it rest for three days until it begins to burn the arm. Then apply a paste of crushed pomegranates with salt, and let the paste remain on it for a new day, because that will eradicate its roots.
Then clean the area with an ointment of generating flesh so that it heals.
And if it is not converted, and some times the claw appears on the surface of the body, mostly on the feet and hands, then know that you should apply in those areas with water, and that is what you take a little amount of iron or of a flash of lightning, and let it rest on the claw; and squeeze a small amount of water tail into it, and hold your hand, and turn it over so that the water tail comes out through the hole made by the claw's root, and then waits for the patient to bite it for an hour, then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus I will make them ready for the other within which they come over all that they are in the body.
Then cure those pustules that the claws of the clogs remove with water so that the meat is not infected.
Chapter .liii.
On the Cauterization from Shaking (Tremors)
When one suffers from tremors due to friction in the nerves, or from a feverish cause by friction, or from another similar cause, then it is said that you should cauterize with four cauterizations or two on each side of the spinal column, placing one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the feet, and one on the stomach.
And the tremors of him shall be at rest, and the health of the disease by friction shall improve.
Chapter.lv.
On the Cauterization of Accidental Wounds in the Body.
When in the body there are accidental wounds, and pus-filled follicles arise from corroded matter; then, at the beginning when it appears, let it be cauterized on all sides of the fistula with a subtle fire-tip, the extreme end being spread with fire; or with razors of long duration; or with a slow-burning cautery.
And some wounds are to be cauterized at the beginning of their discharge according to this manner; and they are not to be stretched out, and the excess fluid is to be stopped by making incisions, and those are to be healed from those.
However, it must be said that this should be done with a bleedings tool.
Chapter lvi.
On the Cauterization of the Flow of Blood from an Accidental Wound by Incision of an Artery.
Too much blood is to be expected when an artery is cut, that is, when the plague (a wound) appears, or when the incision of abscesses or member cauterizations is made, and similar things, and it is difficult to repair those.
Then when it happens to someone, place your hand below the artery at the orifice, and pause it over that one so that the blood flow from underneath the arteriac thumb is stopped, and does not come out.
Then place a few small and large olive-colored cauterizations on it, for many reasons, and exhale over those into the space where they are ignited.
And take from those a small or a large one according to the place and plague in which the artery is broken, quickly before the hand remains completely immobile, and so cauterize that wound where it has been ablated and stopped up with fire.
And if the blood is discharged from the arteriac orifice when you hold the hand immobile and exhale the cauterization, then take another cauterization, prepared in advance in the fire, and so on, stopping up that wound which has been ablated with fire.
And be careful not to burn the nerve which is here, and that it does not come over the patient's side another mischief.
And you should know that when the blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop that blood, and even more so when the artery is large, unless in one of four ways: or by cauterizing as it is said here, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him are burned, and that blood is stopped up; or that it is tied with a cord or a ligature by a strong contraction, or that it is placed on medicines of which the virtue is to stop up that blood; and those are twisted with the palm towards the heart.
However, that which is administered by a cord and by a restriction from him has a more painful effect, and one should be careful not to cause it.
However, if this happens to someone and there is no present medicine or remedy, then open the hand at the orifice of that vein as it has been said here, and understand the great contraction of him within which the blood is stopped from its natural course, and on the artery let not the hand remain immobile; and upon the artery let fire be sprayed with a very cold spray so that the blood congeals and thickens; and also let fire be applied to where it needs to be cauterized or to medicine as necessity requires.
On Incision, Puncture, Bleedings, and Plagues, and their Similarities.
I have already said in the first chapter all illness for which fire is appropriate and medicine, and its occasions and causes, and the instruments with which to make cauterizations; and these chapters of the subsidiary chapters are arranged under the heads within the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter according to that method, so that what is wanted may be found easily; then upon this that it should be sought.
In advance of what I am about to say here, know, and understand that in this chapter it is for fear what is said in the first chapter of Cauterization; and that which is before me, and know that:
And know that in this water which is here with great caution, for in the operation described in this chapter there are many wounds that are caused by the discharge from the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of an ulcer or extraction of an arrow or incision of the throat, and similar things. And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and at their head is death.
And I warn you that upon you not this water should fall, for some wounds are caused by the manner of men's hands, and many similar diseases. And some of them are caused by the nature of their illness, and it is quickly taken from him by this water which is violent, and by the length of his illness, and at the beginning of his illness he is afraid of that which causes his illness; and death follows him for long.
And some are those who give you hope and comfort, but their illness is destructive; and his illness is pernicious.
And then I do not agree that you consent to this manner of men towards you; and your caution should be greater than that which is avoided, and your haste should be less; and do not assume any cause against him except a certain knowledge which certifies that water is harmful for you, and as far as it concerns succession, it is blessed.
And use in the treatment of all your illnesses by means of prediction and indication of him who is helpful in gaining fame and memory, in being praised and glorified.
Or children, God in you his understanding, and do not seek guidance or protection from him, for water is in his hand.
And I have arranged this chapter according to the chapters which preceded it in the Cauterization Chapter, of the cure from the head to the feet, so that what you want may be found easily from what is before you, and from what you need.
Chapter One.
On the Cure of Water which is contained in the head of children.
And you should know that this illness which appears in children is caused by the development and when the brain of the child is lightened.
Some, however, are caused by a hidden cause which is not perceived.
I did not see this illness in children except; and all those whom I saw were dying, and for that reason it was shown to me a work which is done in them.
And I saw that a child had its head filled with water, and that the child's head remained constantly wet until he could not stand it due to the size of his head, and more than the humidity made him sick so that the fire killed him.
And this humidity or is added between the heel and the shin, or it is added below the shin over the Achilles tendon.
For if the operation in that place is little humidity between the heel and the shin and pus there is none, then consider that you have to make a cut in your head's middle location on a fissure in length, and the length of the fissure is two fingers deep, and this is the shape of the sputum:
And therefore if humidity is increased more and pus is larger, then there are two fissures according to this method:
And if humidity is left of the bone, it is an indication that you should make the corners of the head open completely and the water is pressed when you squeeze those from inside out and not up to your face. Consider that you have made three cuts in the middle of the head according to this method:
And let the incision take out all humidity; and strengthen the fissures with gauze and cotton; and pour oil from above on it every fifth day, and then clean the wound and dress it with ointment and bandage, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity so that the member is healed and cured.
And there is another way of incision, which you consider according to the size of the pus and the accumulation of water, because some cuts are in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore make the incision where the pus and the water accumulate, and pour it out according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not incision the artery, and let the blood flow out from a wound of pain and cure the patient for this flow of blood to get rid of humidity.
Chapter II:
When there is a rupture in the lungs or feet, and it is old blood, and you do not give medication to it, then the last cure for this is incision of those two arteries.
And therefore when you want to incision those who have a headache from the back of the head, and rub the area with coarse cloth so that the veins appear, and consider where the pulse is; and the places on each side of the ears are pinched, and hidden in some men.
And then strengthen the vein by trying, and incision each one with a sputum from the middle of each side by making an incision up to the bone, and let it be through the length of the head.
And if you want to, insert the sputum under the artery and turn it around so that the incision is on each side.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width, because when a vein is incised, it beats with a pulsating rhythm, which may stop because it is frequently beaten.
More if the vein does not feel good to the touch, then consider that you measure the quantity of space between three fingers, and then try it, and cut it up to the bone.
And this is the quantity of blood in one cup. and stronger blood does not give up so much or less, and this is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the accumulation of the vein.
And consider the pain, and if there is any cause in the Achilles tendon area, then incision it so that it does not cause pus.
And strengthen the pain with gauze and a drape bandage, and then clean that with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter III:
Of the extraction of veins that are in the temples.
When there is a headache from the left side or from the right side due to alcoholic or other causes, and it responds to medication, but you do not cure it, then we will turn to the extraction of veins in the temples or cauterization of those as if they were shown how to treat them.
And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient rubs the hair in the temples because it is what is shown to him by his pulse; and the vein appears on the forehead because it is shown there by its movement, and it is hidden in a few men by its speed.
And if it is hidden from you, then the back of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and rub the area with a coarse cloth or evaporate the area with water until the vein appears clearly to you. Then take the following sputum: And then take the heel with that ease until you reach the vein; and cut it from the sides separately until you extract the heel vein and uncover those of the shoes which are left there, completely.
More if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the end of a finger, and incision one from the side according to the quantity by which the ends of the legs are stretched and contracted, and do not give up blood because if they are not incised, the blood will not rise from the feet.
And then let the blood out of one cup. into three.
And if the vein is large, then consider that you tie it in two places with strong thread or rope, and do not allow it to break before the healing of the pain, and give up blood from it in front of the consolidation of the pain.
And then incision the surplus which is between two bands; and make it in that hour or another hour.
And if you want to, cauterize it with fire within the bone by cauterizing the ends of the legs, and keep that place where it has been cauterized.
And it is better work than the patient has fever or it is a cold complex; for cauterization helps to end humidity, and therefore it is better in healing.
And then consider the extraction of veins that are in the back of the head, and let them rest on a clean cloth, and then clean those with dry medications so that the flesh is healed and cured, and the blood is made clear.
And if while you open another vein that comes out of the vein of blood from the arteria, then consider that you stop it by strengthening your hand until it stops bleeding; or cauterize it, or that you tie it up, and tighten your hand so that it stops bleeding. And if for any reason those are not with you, then pause the finger on that place until the pain stops hurting, and pour cold water on the wound until it stops aching, and strengthen it according to what is done.
And the time for blood to be extracted from a vein is that you cauterize the vein with two knives, because you have tied those two places together with a string, and pause each one, igniting it, until it reaches the bone, and incising the vein in two places, so that it is stretched between the ends of the legs, because they are not healed by that cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
Then it will be sharp on both sides. But if there are less sharp points than two knives that fit each other properly, and do not cut the flesh quickly, then it is better.
Then with some thickness, the fire's heat is applied to it and the flesh is cut easily.
And this work is better in all works and less laborious.
Then the space between two knives should be a measure of the thickness of the flesh.
I capitulate.
Of the treatment for sharp and acidic joint pain in the feet.
When the painful joints are caused by acidic blood that comes out of those veins that come from the top of the head and do not cause any problem with the use of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and it feels like there is a crawling sensation in front of them, as if it were an itch, and their feet are tired, so their hair becomes coarse, and their eyelids are scarred by the sharpness of the tears, we will not use this treatment.
And you command the servant to shave the hair that is on the patient's forehead, and make three cuts evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the cut falls on two fingers: the first cut is evenly spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle position of the forehead, and the second cut is according to the length of a little more than the movement of the eyelashes, and the third cut is on the other side.
And keep your hand away from the incisions that are two inches long, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is a measure of three fingers.
And if you have a thin sponge or dry cloth ready, with which to extract the blood.
Then return the two sharp ends together, and this is the form of the incision: which begins at the first incision and finishes at the second one. Then cut off all the tissue between those two incisions that is over the bone, and then make a smaller incision between it and the second one. Then use this sponge and insert it into the first incision, then another instrument that is called a knife, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
Then lift up the jaw of that animal with your hand and bone behind it, and then cut it off at the neck so that it comes out through the small incision, and cut all the vessels that come from the head to the feet.
Then continue the incision after the tendon has been cut, and then make another small incision between it and the other one.
Then pour the blood that falls from a small quantity evenly spaced into the sponge that is under the incision.
Then place a small knife blade in each crease, and place it over the dust that is mixed up with dirt, oil, and vinegar, and dip it into salt water.
Then on the third day, cut off all the flesh and administer cold water, then treat the blood with basil-oil and other substances that make wounds heal.
I capitulate.
Of the treatment for hiccups by catharsis and when the pain is caused by something coming out of the mouth from inside the head.
When the hiccups are caused by catarrh and continue, and sometimes the feet of the patient become tired, and already their appearance improves, and their eyelids become scarred and their hair becomes coarse, and in the front of the head there is an acute pain that feels like it is burning and coming out, then you know for sure that these things are caused by something that comes out from inside the head through the mouth.
And the best treatment for this is: command the servant to shave the forehead, and make a small incision in the middle position (and start the incision of the left temple within the right temple; and cut off the bone that is covered with skin, and extend your hand from the tongue), then open it wide.
Then dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill the incision between the two lips with a small knife or a piece of cloth. Then dip it in dirty water mixed with oil to prevent the wound from bleeding.
Then when the blood has stopped and the pustule has shrunk, then know that it is time to cut off the bone from where it begins, and then treat the flesh with a mixture of flour and water, and four parts of colophony, and make a paste out of it, and administer it to the affected areas.
I capitulate.
Of the treatment for water that is caused in the ears.
Any cause of water in the ears is one of four kinds, because it is either mineral and causes similarity to lead and copper, or it is plant-like and similar to hazelnut and fava bean, or it is fluid and similar to water and vinegar, or some animal.
Then if lead or copper causes water in the ears, or if it is plant-like and similar to hazelnut and fava bean, then dip the ear on its own into oil of violets or sizami, and then treat with the extract, and make a sound like sneezing, and if there is a need for sneezing, then make the patient sneeze. Then place a few pieces of cloth or wool over the ear, and extend it upwards, because the movement of the wax is caused by this.
Then if it is not caused by this, then treat with an extract of the plant called ghee, and make sure that you are treating the right ear. And this is the form of treatment:
And if it is caused by gesticulation, then treat with half a teaspoon of ghee; otherwise, treat with one teaspoon of double-boiled ghee.
Then if it is not caused by water, then make a tube of metal and insert the end into the ear canal and close it with wax and softened oil so that it does not come out easily but through the tube. Then remove it carefully with a small piece of wire that is tied to a strong cord, because three times have passed since we counted the water that we have mentioned.
Then if it is not caused by this method, then hold a piece of string or a small cloth around the ear carefully, and place a little quantity, and pause it with your finger. Then return it into the ear with ease, then dry the ear with a cloth.
Then if it is not caused by the causes that we have mentioned, then you are a doctor who treats hiccups and spasms.
And the way to cut it is that you command the servant to cut off the head of the blood vessel and extract it from the foot, and then make a small incision in the middle position, and turn the ear upside down, and dip it in water. Here is the translation of the text:
If the cause of the swelling is in the ear, which is caused by pus and infection, then administer the cure and extract it; but if you do not obey the doctor's orders, then take this subtle solution according to this form: and administer to that person the removal of the pus which is in the ear.
And do not pour water when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put it in a bowl, and extract it with your nails or with a subtle tool, or cut off as much as possible, because it is easier to remove.
But in the water that enters the ear, the patient should use sneezing before starting, and fill his nose with cold water, and blow it out over that ear, and if by doing so there is a discharge, it is good; and otherwise, then take two or three fresh peens and cut them according to its length, and wrap those in fire slightly, and let the patient put one of those peens into his ear and jump on that part a little, and strike with another peen over the pein which enters the ear. So that water does not come out until all the water has been discharged.
So that water does not come out until all the water has been discharged. And already the water has been discharged, then take paper or a cotton wool ball, that is to say, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it is burned.
And then put another cotton wool ball and pour water as many times as needed until all the water has been discharged, and wrap it with a cane as much as necessary to remove it from the ear.
But in the extraction of a beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then wrap it and remove it with a hook as we said above in the division; but if it is a big thing that causes pain to the whole head, then administer the extraction with nails and tools, and the cause of it is less serious than all other causes that enter into the ear.
But in the extraction of a vermen that is born in the ear, when you cure that with water as we said above and in the distillation treatise, and if you do not have confidence in your cure, then look at the ear towards the sun.
And if there is any cause of the vermen, then extract it with a subtle tool or a nail, but if there is no cause, then take a long and wide cane as described above in the form of it. And insert the thin end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient suffers, and then suck it with a strong suction, and pour water as many times as needed until all the worms have been discharged.
But if you do not obey the doctor's orders, then wrap it and close it up in the cane with wax as we said above; then administer distillation that has already been prepared for the treatment of worms, and look at water in the distillation treatise.
And be your infusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form of it: Make it of silver or brass, narrow, and on one end, there is a small hole, and above it.
And then wrap it with a tape that covers the opening of the cane where it is necessary. And if you wish, take a thread and wrap it around the end of it nicely with a knot, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or some juice of any herb, or water that you want from these medicines in the cane – and that is in the ear –, and then insert the thread into the cavity and squeeze your hand to expel the oil into the cavity of the ear and the patient will feel it inside.
And water that is poured into the ear has already been burned slightly by fire. And be careful that the cause that you will extract from the ear is not too strong, because the ear medicines do not tolerate water well.
Chapter 7.
Of Treatment of Ear Aching.
Some small children of old men are not pierced, and water has already occurred in some adults, causing pain in the middle part of the ear due to disease or meat, and this pain sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear, and sometimes it is in the splits.
That which occurs in the middle part of the ear, which does not understand the cause, is in difficult treatment.
And in that which you can understand the cause, be careful to pause the patient' ear towards the sun and look at it. But if there is a lot of pain, open that with a subtle opening tool, which is described in this form:
If the end of it is small in size, and one part is sharp and the other is not; and the blade is two or three nails long so that it does not cut the ear.
But if the aching is caused by hidden meat in the ear or in the middle part of it, then extract it with subtle nails and cut it with a sharp cutting tool quickly so that all the meat is removed.
If the aching is in the entrance of the ear, then take a sharp, subtle tool and burn it slightly, and then put that in the middle part of the ear.
But if the patient feels pain with water that he drinks and is not able to hear well, then try to press it easily; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then pause the ear with wax according to the width of the cane that you have wrapped in Egyptian balm; and pour water a little at a time over it until you are sure of the consolidation of the ache; or take some herbs and crush them, and sprinkle them on it, and use it; and if the ear is already infected, then be careful to destroy the herb and replace it with another that is made with rose oil, so that the infection eases; and then cure that until it is healed.
But if there is a lot of pain, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and press it against the ear, and use the other treatment that we said in the distillation treatise to stop the pain, which is called:
Chapter 8.
Of Treatment of Achesil, Which Enters Between the Eyebrows.
That which enters between the eyebrows of the person sometimes is wet, and sometimes it is dry.
And if you have those with a high temperature or with nails, cut them into pieces with a sharp blade and then pause them on the affected areas.
But if there is pain due to a lot of blood flowing, then you will cauterize those with a subtle, sharp knife.
And the best cauterization is done with sharp knives and the blood flowing out is stopped when there remains any cause of bleeding; and when cauterized with fire, those bleeding are burned up and do not return.
Chapter .ix.
Treatment for blindness that comes to the eyelids of the eyes:
Blinding pain that comes to the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is combined with blindness and toughness, and for this reason it is called blindness.
It is an addition of thick moisture on the inner eyelid, and above and below it.
Then the treatment is that you should consider if the blindness comes from above and below it, which is different from the pain on the eyelid, and the cause of it is unknown.
Then open that with a sharp knife from top to bottom, and remove it easily if it comes out, and cut off that which is attached to the other by means of a thread, and
And if the case is serious, then you should adjust it with a stitch; and treat that which has been injured so that it may heal.
And if it is little, you will not suffer much from that pain, for the blood of it restores and heals it.
And if the blindness is declining towards the inner part of the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and cut off the blindness with a thread so that you do not suffer from the operation, and press that which is on all sides; and if the eyelid, by means of a cut, is drawn out, then there is no cause for worry.
Then open that with water, and clean the eyes well; and treat the area with fire so that it may be healed.
Chapter.x.
Of treatment for blindness in the eyelid above the eye:
Axe-injury is what happens in the skin of the eyelid above the eye, and most often affects children, causing them to weep a lot because they cannot see clearly.
And because of this, you often see things in a blurred way, and they sleep a lot; and on the inner eyelids there are moist hairs that already cover the swelling with air, and the appearance of a lump is visible when you press it with your fingers; and when you touch those hairs, you can feel the sensation of fire within them.
There is a way to operate on that which the patient holds his head in his hand and presses it down with a cloth, and makes five cuts there, and from those five circles a part is cut off, and that circle is placed above that which has been injured so that fire can be applied to it; and then place it on the middle of the circle, and open that humidity which has collected there by pressing it with your fingers so that it may become solid again, and then open that which was closed by means of a cut from top to bottom, and the cut should not be bigger than the one that is made in flaubotomia.
But in the case of a cold injury, you should cut off all the skin so that you can reach fire; for in the different positions of the body the fire is applied by means of a crack according to the shape of white snow.
Then take it off with the clothes that you have wrapped between your fingers, and turn it over from one side to the other while holding it in the middle so that it is completely cut off.
And remember not to press the crack too hard so that fire does not reach the eyelid and burn it;
But if fire does not appear at the beginning of the crack, rather than pressing it, you should place a small piece of cloth on the inside so that it may produce fire; and then remove it as we have said; and then dip the cloth in water and clean it with ashes, and place it over the area and press it with your fingers.
Then sprinkle salt on it and place it in the cavity of the crack so that the moisture that has collected there is removed.
And then treat that which has been injured so that it may heal.
But if it is a sudden injury with swelling, then treat that with a poultice so that it may heal.
Chapter.xi.
Of methods for testing the eye:
When the eyelids of the eyes become swollen and irritated by the adjustment of the natural hairs, then test the eye with fire, or with sharp knives and threads so that the lid is opened and closed again, and this is called "tactininir" of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by fire cauterization; or with acute medicine as it has been said in the chapter on cauterization; or with a knife according to the direction of the eyes; or with straws, depending on whether they look straight.
And then place the head of the patient on your right hand; and turn the eyelid of the eye towards you with your left hand, and if it turns, it is good; and if not, put a needle into that which is faithful to the crack near the lid, and make the needle penetrate into that which is faithful from above, and it should be— close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs — close to the hairs, and pull the thread through the lid, and turn it towards yourself.
Then open that which is inside the eyelid near the hairs with a needle and thread so that it may reach the lacrimal major from above the lacrimal minor; then remove the thread and place it on the eyelid with small pieces of cloth or cloth, and press it with your fingers to check whether there is fire on the eyelid; and if there is such a figure as a crescent moon.
But in any case, remember that the figure should be different according to the amount of swelling on the eyelid, because fire has been discovered among people, because those who have suffered from blindness do not admit that the eyelid has swelled to a certain degree.
Then open that on the two lines you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major towards the lacrimal minor. And if your crack is close to the natural hairs in such a way that it is the width of a king's finger.
Then place a piece of gold in one of the two corners of the cloth, and remove it completely, and adjust with a thread that is very thin between the two lips with yarn or fine wool, and wipe off the fat from the thread, and make it adhere to the hair above the eyebrows by means of a certain substance if you wish to do so, and if not, do not worry about it.
Then leave the stitch between three or four days, and then treat that which has been injured.
And if you wish, leave the wound without suturing, and treat that which has been injured with fire so that it dries up and hardens, because the eyelid becomes swollen by means of a seal when there is swelling; but it is better to stitch it up well. And therefore say that the ancient methods of treatment are good.
But in any case, it should be sought out on the patient, and it is a good operation, and it is not feared.
And another way of treatment is that you see on the eyelid such a figure as a crescent moon, and then raise the eyelid with three separate and close needles according to this form:
But if that is not possible, use a needle, and if it does not close, take another needle with thread on the middle of the figure, and turn one end of the thread towards the lacrimal major, and the other end towards the lacrimal minor, and adjust the threads between your fingers so that they are equal, and then lift them up with a slight elevation towards the edge where it is open, lift all the cloth from that which has been injured by means of a slight elevation.
And then he adjusts the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and he heals that part which should be healed.
If however an abcess develops on your incisions or fissures, then treat that abcess with a poultice and a dressing.
And some times the eyelids themselves are turned inward so that you have to use an incision for them - a stitch is enough for this.
To cut off hair from the face in the form of a mustache or beard: And you make two little needles or tweezers from the thread, the length of which should be according to the width of the eyelid, and the thickness of it according to the thickness of the eyebrow. You have already cut into the ends of all fractures, where you have the threads.
Then add a little more of the thread to those ends which are too long from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the needles on all sides with a sharp instrument, leaving one for several days; because if it is cut off by itself, it will rot and putrefy inside and go bad.
But if the time passes on, then break the thread with a twine, and then heal that wound which should be healed.
So when it is firm, the eyelid rises and does not prick.
And this is how to make two little needles according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
Of the raising of hair on the face with a hook when the hair is hard.
When the hair is not natural, hard and sharp on the face, then perform the operation in the following way: take a very small hook, pause it on that thread which is subtle and soft and lean, and then adjust the ends of it with a needle in a subtle manner. And be the length of the threads of a palm's quantity.
Then you continue with another subtle thread under it, and pierce the ends of it if you want to.
Then place the patient's head with his face toward the sun, so that your work is visible, because it is a subtle and small operation.
Then he inserts the hook into the hair root with care, and makes it enter quickly into the eyelid from the hair that has grown out of the natural hair.
Then pull the hair out from under it and make it enter into the eye, and the hairs be one or two or three, not more.
Then pull your hand from that place where the hair has grown out of the natural hair on the eyelid with the hair still attached.
But if it is pulled out of the eye and not taken from the hair, then you pull it out of the ends with a thread that you have tied to it from that place, where it has been removed from the eye.
And then he will have good vision of the eye because you remove it from the place and tie it with a thread; so that each end is clamped down on it, and he leaves it for two or three days, within which time the hair adheres to its place and grows out from there.
And if the hair is too long, then adjust a long thread from the natural hair; and raise it up to that place or, what you leave, so that its length is increased by a little space, and then you raise it.
Chapter 13.
Of the treatment of a bump on the eyelid above.
When there is a bump on the eye lid and it is hard, and it is drawn down from its place to the right or left part by bad consolidation of a wound or section or cauterization, and that is called leporine; and this either occurs naturally or accidentally, and is made by consolidation of a wound or section or cauterization, or by resembling them in an unfortunate way.
And the way to operate on it is that you cut off that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause them in between which is a strip of cloth from linen, and tie them together so that they are healed.
And you do not use any cure for it from the causes which cause it to dry up or become hard; because if you make water return to it, it will become even harder than before.
And use that which softens it: such as fenugrec, and immerse in water from which the herbs are high and salt of the sea; or brew a little oil, and dip in it the strip, and heal with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all operations except those which are hard at the beginning.
And this operation which we have described is nothing else than a correction of a bump that does not return to its form before it begins.
Chapter 14.
Of the treatment of a bump on the eyelid below.
This bump, which is treated on the eyelid below, which is called a "vertable" bump, and is either natural or accidental.
And if it is made accidentally by a wound or section or cauterization or similar causes.
And the way to operate on it is that you take a hook with a double thread, and pass it under the eye from the tear duct on the left side into the tear duct on the right side, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh from its ends with the hook and cut it with the knife, and then you incise it with a wide knife. Then if it returns to its form as it was before; and no, then you take the thread and place it in the split of the eyelid, and then you turn the eyelids to their places, and make two splits in the middle of the eyelid below.
Then the ends of the two splits in the middle of the eyelid below are made at different angles to the incision which meets them, and when their angles come together, it forms a figure.
And this shape is the Greek letter: Omega.
Then stretch the flesh out with the same quantity that is the width of it on each side of it, and hold it so that it does not close the eyelid.
Then he adjusts the separate parts and sews them with a wool thread; then he heals those with a soft medicine and water in which they have been soaked, so that they are healed.
If the bump is treated by a split or stitch or cauterization, then know that you should make a flat split on the hair of the eyelid according to what precedes it. Then separate the two ends with a sharp instrument as we have said.
In the summary of the speech on the treatment of a bump which is above or below, and carry out the operation, according to how it is prepared as a bump, and that is in a form of different shapes.
And the skilled person knows how to prepare himself at all times in such a way that it does not return to its natural form, or comes close to it, and prepares it according to what is required for the operation and the instruments which are most useful.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in certain individuals so that the eyelid is firmly joined to the white of the eye, and interferes with its natural movement; then know that you should not meddle with the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and raise it up or extend it outward from between those two parts.
And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel, which is not sharp in the incisions, keeping it obtuse so that the patient does not worry about the operation, and leaving the scalpel dull so that it does not harm the skin with its sharpness.
Then your incision should easily remove that adhesion, returning the eyelid according to its natural form and healing all of the adhesion.
And then you should put seawater on it, which you wash with; or dissolve it in water from a spring that is dissolved in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the eye with calamine, and place it on the eye with lanolin infused with aloe, and after three days use curative agents within that is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On Eye Incisions and the Prominence of the Facial Bones of the Eyelids.
You know that the eyelid is according to two manners, because it is either nervous, and is similar to hard cypher subtle; or it is not nervous, like white frozen moisture, which when it is touched, it must be forced out with an edge, and the edge is cut off, and the edge does not remain.
And both spices do not begin until after the lacrimal gland, which runs little by little to cover the vision and prevent light from moving the eye.
May the manner of working in this incision is that the patient keeps his head on his back, and opens his eyelids, and raises the eyelid to your hand, and collects the eyelid with a few double folds, and extends it to the corners thereof. And then take a needle and insert it into that hair of horse or cow or milk, or of similar things, or of strong yarn, and double the end of the needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the eyelid, and pierce it with the needle, and fasten it to the yarn; and extend it to the corners thereof, and cut off that hair from the eyelid which covers the pupil. And then you should follow that hair inside until the back of it.
And then you should cut the root of the eyelid with a fine scalpel or small scissors, and let the flesh of the natural eyelid remain so that by cutting it, there is not continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the eyelid is spread with oil of olive or with strong yarn, thus: this has been said, and then it should be cut with a lion's scalpel, whose shape is:
And keep in mind that you do not touch the corneal tunic with the blade, and that the hole is made with the breakdown, and the pupil is pierced.
Then the incision should be made in the eye with a few drops of salt water or strong vinegar, and let that remain inside until it is healed; and then care for that with water that covers the inside, so that it is healed.
If the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it, or if it is not fixed to that hair of yarn, then these medicines are used for such an eyelid, and they are cured in this way with eye and advice in division.
And if you want to cut that off, then open the patient's eyelids and take a lion' scalpel, sharp according to this form: with subtlety. And if that eye is rarefied and is contracted and is placed in the root of the eyelid, then it is dissolved with the oil of olive or strong vinegar, and the eye is left inside until another day.
Then repeat the operation on that until all of it is removed, but if not, let it remain, and then care at the beginning for the swelling, because then you should let that be, and heal that at the beginning.
Then repeat your operation on that with reason so that it is healed.
The prominence of the eyelid, if you see a lot of damage in it, should be suspended with yarn; and cut that hair from one corner, and do not finish the incision so that tears do not flow.
Then dissolve in the eyelid strong oil or olive oil until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On Incisions of Eyebrow and the Water that Is Born from Meat Tended on the Eye.
Some eyebrows are born on the eyelids, and they are placed close to the pupil, or brought closer or further apart on the eyelids, and the eyelid is held together at both sides by rope of yarn, and assembled with a knot at the base of the eyebrow.
May the operation be that the patient keeps his head on his back; and open those eyelids, and collect all that meat with a sharp edge, and then with a forceps or basket; and then cut off that meat little by little until it is finished with the incision, and keep in mind the eyelid so that you do not injure it with your operation.
And your incision should be the one that cuts those or with a scalpel which we have mentioned in the incision of the eyelid, or with small scissors whose shape is that described for this chapter.
Then when your incision is complete and all that meat has been removed, then fill the eye with salt water, or dissolve it into powder that looks like the medicine's corrosives, and place it on the eyelid at both sides with aloe until it is secured from swelling.
And if any cause of eyebrow is cut off, and you fear swelling, then leave the eye alone, and heal that swelling with water that softens that swelling, and then repeat your operation on that until it is healed, and shape the meat that occurs in the eyelid of this kind.
However, you must remember that all cure for the eye is done by natural or accidental means, be careful, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member suffers from them.
Chapter XVIII.
On Collection of Sabular in the Eye.
The sabular veins are red and thin veins that run on the eye, and they prevent from injuring your operation, and they are seen for a long time.
Then it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is sabular is strong and has another disease besides the sabular, then collect that sabular.
And it is that you command the patient to keep his head on his back, and suspend those veins with a yarn of two according to your prudence; and be that yarn of two subtle duplication according to this form:
or two yarns gradually in one place according to this form:
Then those veins should be collected with subtle scissors, with subtlety, and abstain from shaving the eye for a while, so that those veins are not removed from the eyelid and are shredded.
And keep in mind that you do not injure the eye with the edge of the scalpel; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun rises, and be steady in your operation so as not to cut it off with those veins.
And when you are finished, then dissolve in the eye strong vinegar or olive oil so that sabular is removed with it.
If water is not possible to collect at that time, and then collect all of it with a forceps until the pain of it has subsided, and leave it for a few days so that the pain of it is eased and the swelling is secured.
And let him repeat the same manner as often as it will be necessary until he is healed.
This is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
On reducing a hernia to the nose.
When you treat acute hernias with either cautery or medicine according to the sequence of events and it does not heal, then let them be cut off at the root, and that you remove all the moisture that is in them and which makes them come out, so that the bone be uncovered.
And therefore, when the bone is exposed and becomes black or infected, then cut it off with this instrument whose form is as follows:
It is called a sharp cap, and it shall be made of iron, and the cap should be round in form, so that it may be made to point with a file or with a fine point (so it should be in the following form).
And place that over the spot where the bone has rotted away, and move it back and forth between the toes, and press your hand little by little until you feel that the corruption is rough.
And some drops should be made, and then restore the area with drying and tightening agents.
Then if the place is consolidated and good flesh covers it, so that the hernia does not break through the skin and the opening is small, for ten days, and then it has not broken open or become inflamed, you will know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then it is not healed but to reduce the opening to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and that you uncover the second bone with either cautery or acute medicine, and when you have uncovered the bone, then let them follow this form:
The extremity of the iron should be triangular, and the handle should be slightly curved at the end.
And place that over the bone, and let it be near to the lacrimal; and extend your hand slightly towards the heel, and move your hand back and forth against the tribe until you feel the patient's pulse pulsing through the osseous part, and that you hear a sound like wind that blows through it when you move your hand.
Then restore the area with drying medicinal substances  to stop the bleeding.
Then when the flesh in that place has healed over, then the substance which comes out of the nose should be made to run again into the nose, and when it is thicker, then make it thinner with a liquid.
Chapter XX.
On reducing a protuberance of the heel.
When the heel protrudes completely and nothing happens to it or there is no decrease, then let you loosen the lacing, and then let you follow these orders, and then let you pause with wind in the throat for a good reason; and then place an ointment on the heel made of acatra, aloe, oil, and sarcollo, and then tighten the plaster over the heel with fine powder.
And the manner of the powder is that you take sheets of linen cloth, and each sheet is doubled up four times; and make these sheets from the above cloth.
Then place those on top of each other according to the quantity that the heel requires. Then place those on top of each other with a hard, tight cloth; and then let you follow the order of wind and sucking for sacrifice; and then remove the winds and leave the heel to dry for a day or two.
Perhaps if the lacing becomes soft, then let it be tight.
Then remove the lacing when you have dried it out.
And if the heel has already been reduced, then it is well; and otherwise, then let you repeat the ointment with the powder and the tightness and the wind, until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On incisions of a protuberance of the eye lid.
When there is an obstruction in the eyelids, and it protrudes, cut it off with a razor, and it resembles the shape of a man from the water; and let the blade go into the root of the eyelid on the side near to the lacrimal, and then let the blade go into another where it has double threads, and make that one go in; and then let you cut the place of the double thread and tighten it with a knot; and then make the incisions of the other eyelid following its contour; and then tie up that one.
Then remove the blade, and place it over the heel, infused with wool mixed with milk of sheep; and leave it until it hardens.
And then cure the heel with water that comforts it within so that the plague is healed.
Some eye lids accumulate a lot of fluid around the whole edge, and then it is pierced with a fine needle that enters the root of the eyelid, and then the moisture is drained away, and the lid falls down and disappears quickly.
Then let it be tightened so that it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of cataracts.
This disease, which is called alconata, is nothing but a disease that resembles descending water and it does not belong to it.
The manner of the work in it is that you make the lacing come down from the upper part of the eye lid and go up to the two halves of your fingers, and then let it be tied so that you do not see the patient' s eye; and then let it be dried out and then open the eye, and then let the patient look around with his eyes.
And if it does not come down in the lower part, you will know that it is water.
And if it is not prepared with water that you have mentioned, then make the lacing come down to the edge of the eyelid and then place a fine needle on it, and then let it pierce the eyelid slightly, going through the cornea, in the area near to the white part (in the edge of the eye lid) until the disease is removed.
Then when it has been removed, you shall distill in the heel water that you have mixed with honey or water that you have already brewed with fenugrec and honey.
Then let him be cured of other diseases until he is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of descending water from the heel.
We have mentioned the spices of the water in the division and which are to be boiled with the herbs, then let those follow for healing.
Then let you make the lacing come down between your fingers on a piece of cloth, and then tie it tightly with the heel that is exposed; and let him lie down on his side.
Then place your hand on the eyelid of the heel that is exposed on the side where the water comes from; or on the right side if the water comes from the left heel, or on the left side if the water comes from the right heel.
Then place your hand on the right side with a palm towards you if the heel is left, or on the left side with a palm towards you if the heel is right.
Then place the end of the finger near to the root because of the thickness of the eyelid on the side of the lacrimal, and then press it towards you with power, and then move your hand back and forth against the edge.
Then let it penetrate into the heel and feel that the water has come out because of the pain.
And then let you measure the distance of the path of water to the edge of the eye lid from the pupil to the end of the color, and that is the root of the heel; for you shall see with that eye the vision of the heel through the clarity of the cornea.
And if you put the alum in a place where there is water, and if you throw it down a hole once, and if the water comes up soon enough, then remove the patient from where he is, so that the alum falls into his wound when he moves.
And if you pause for a moment, then if the water comes up again, then remove that other cushion before alum is thrown.
And if it does not come up again, then take the alum out slowly, and with your hand rub the wound inside slightly with clear salt from a gem and wash it with water; and then remove the cloth or stop the wound or wrap it in wool soaked in rose oil and white wine. And place it outside the hole.
May they who are of our time pause on that with white wine.
And if you don't obey your alum to the instrument of the wound due to its hardness — for it is some of those people whose wound is hard sometimes —, then when you take the spatulum that is called alberid, and this is the form:
And then pierce that intersection with the spatulum, and do not stop your hand in the trauch, and do not stop unless you put alum at that spot.
Then add alum according to what we have said.
And you should pay a compliment on your work, prepared in the patient's bedroom peacefully, and refrain from all movements.
And pause in nature for it to be smooth, and do not hurt the patient' head to the left or right.
Then add the alum according to its disposition within three days.
Then take it away from that dark room and examine the patient's face carefully, and then return the alum within a day. vii.
And do not say that you should add water at the time of cure or shortly after adding infusion. While you are away, add water because the water flows gently from a high place and with great force in regard to it.
May it happen that you find a swelling, then when you take the wound away from the seventh day, and adjust it with water to remove the swelling.
Then return your hand and pause over the patient' face by which it is received from them for several days in that dark room.
Then you will be well with that room gradually, and consult about its causes.
And know that in alchemy it is not allowed to avoid vision some times, and then you are diligent with the operation.
And it has come to us of some of those who are of Artax, and some said that it makes fire in the Airac magic by piercing it with alum, which causes water to flow out.
But it seems that in our land there was not water which had done that, nor the water which came out of some of the ancients' treasures; and it seems that this is new.
And these are the forms of magic spices, in order to place them on those who do not know them:
And they are made of iron or metal properly, and the extremities of their hand are in this triangular shape, that is to say, with the tip acute, so it is done.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure for meat in the nose.
When in the nose are hidden meats that are adjusted from which there is some cause, which is assembled to the sign of many feet or to a pollen; and this bad condition is called pollen because it resembles the appearance of that foot represented. And from it is meat cancer, lappet, of a red color; and not from it is meat of a lion of a reddish color.
Then in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous meat among these lions, pause between your hands and place it in the shade, and open its nostrils, and cut the nose at the tip into those meats. Then take that away from the other side beforehand, and cut it with a sharp knife carefully, so that you know all the meat is gone; if by any chance it remains, then take this water easily into one of the instruments for cutting carefully, so that it does not leak. May it happen that you find a swelling at the time of cure or shortly after adding infusion, then pause taking water; or if it is a malignant swelling, then cut and cauterize it carefully within that it has been severed in several places, and all the openings are sealed.
Then add to the nose near the incision half a grain of pepper and water or vinegar. May it happen that the nose is open and you see moisture coming out of the palate; then know that it is already cured.
May it happen that the moisture does not penetrate according to what we have said, then know that inside there is no meat in the upper nostrils where it has not been severed.
Then when you enter faithfully into the fowl, and cut it into pieces, and pause between each piece the quantity of the said or less, and cut the meat at one end of the fowl in the nose by the bone or for any other reason that is possible;
Then when the water has come out, that it be smelled within that it reaches to the nostrils, and be put on its belly, because many children by such an action are led to schools, and there is no cause for that person who wants to do it.
Then pause the two extremities of the flesh, one end that comes out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then add minced meat to those ends, and put water inside that you know the meat is already at the tips of the fowl;
Then take the flesh away, and pause in the nose before severing the tip of the meat into three pieces, and put water inside for three or more days within that it becomes warm;
Then when the cause is finished, pause in the nose a tube of lead for many days until it is cured.
May it happen that you use this cure if you find it effective.
And this is the form of the instrument for cleaning and making water and medicines in the nose:
Then water of silver or iron, which resembles a small torch lit up, so with a small bowl, and the meat resembling it.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the instrument for cleaning is flat and open; hold it with your hand at the back, and when you want to use the water or oil from the suction, you will not be able to see it.
Chapter .xxv.
About the nostrils.
Mottos seen in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and omented on various days within which mott it is laid out in the regard of him.
And so that you do not miss anything in the beginning of its appearance, and inherit everything. Then pause on the spot or use a cauterizing or burning medicine which was on the spot of him.
May it be delayed in its incision before it is magnified, consider if it is lapidated, hard, of scaly color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with fire because the apostema is rotten; for mottos seen in the extremities of the nose, and it is a great malice over him who has it.
And if the apostema is of a lion touch and not of a scaly color, and sometimes that incision is possible in all of it, then empty the patient and incise it with fear, and cure the spot with water which comes out and constricts within which is healed.
Chapter  .xxvi.
Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the earlobe when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by similar things.
Know that when it happens solution of continuity in one of these cartilage, little confer in that operation but in some men.
Therefore, when it happens to some for a certain cause of those, that you consider if it is a fresh plague and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with the suture, and then cure it within which is healed.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each is healed well, then consider that you remove each of their knots apparently within which does not escape a plague. Then adjust the two lips with the suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle the plague of dragon and anoint it three times, and pause over the powder a pes of plaster diafinicon, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave it glued for two days or for three, then remove it and replace that plaster and leave it within which they are per se healed, and then cure it with oil within which is healed.
May the way of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or by needles also as it has been described in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of Continuity to the fiel also as it has been said to you and let it know.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts inside.
Mottos seen in the insides of the two lips of some men are apostemas hard similar to fat of errors, and some of them are small and some are large.
Therefore consider that you smooth the lips and divide each of those hardnesses of all parts, and then the abscission fill the place with three times within which the plague is restrained, and then wash it with vine acid and cure the spot with water which is astringent within which is healed.
Chapter  .xxviii.
Of the incision of the flesh adapted in the gums.
Great care the nostrils are cut above the meat adapted which the young appeal to the white, therefore consider that you suspend those with a nail or that you have them with the forecords and incise that from its root, and let the blood run or the plague.
Then pause on the spot three times or other powders astringent or exfoliative.
And if that meat returns, then incise it again from another side, and cauterize it for it will not return with cauterizing.
Chapter .xxix.
Of reasons of teeth by iron.
When in the surface of teeth of the insides and of the forums and between the gums are adapted rough edges, smoothes, and some seen are black and are formed citrin or green within which the gum moves by water and the teeth are formed smoothes.
And therefore consider that you file between your teeth and pause the top of him on the thread, and measure the teeth in which appear those rough edges and causes similar to sand within which is not caused by anything, and then it forms the blackness and the citrinity and some others within which are mondified.
Therefore if it is water that is in those of the beginning of the reason, then it is not; and if not, then you repeat the reason over those to another day and to the second and to the third within which comes to the last statement in which you want.
Know that teeth have need of many resources of different shapes and of many figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore because the reason with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the reason with which it is cut between teeth according to other shapes, and these forms of reasons are surely prepared that you will see soon enough.
Chapter   .xxx.
Of the eradication of teeth.
Consider that you cure the pain of the tooth from all its causes and delay in any eradication of him, because there is no cause that replaces the substance of him when it is eradicated, for it is an excuse in the eradication of him.
May consider that when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, firmly you must be certain what tooth is painful, because the pain disenchants the patient and causes him to believe that it is in a healthy tooth, and then eradicate that one and let the pain not cease until the painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by operation of barbies.
Then consider that you are certain what tooth is painful and that you know it well, then consider that you scarify the root of the tooth in which there is no virtue within which is dissolved from the gum of all parts, and then cut that one with pliers at a small beginning little by little within which comes to the concaved.
Then fasten with a strong knot large by good speech or loud noise, and pause the top of him between the threads that are not yours to cut him away, and then fix the tooth again from another side in a way that does not break it, nor give pain to the other one.
And if it is not форо-getat, then take one of those instruments, and put that from him from all parts with ease and force the removal of him so as it was done at the beginning.
May it is a rotten tooth or corroded, then consider that you remove the cloth of him from all parts with ease and strings that do not cut in the hour of your constriction on it with pliers.
Then consider that you open with great care in the root of all parts of the gum and save your strength to not break it and does not cause a fracture in the beginning of him, and return to the patient for his maliciousness is less than the first pain of him.
And consider that you do not make water come out of those barbers in their lastness and audacity on the eradication of them, because they did not administer water which we have described; for mottos seen come out on the men with big plagues which are harder to cut, and the roots of them become whole, or some of them, or extract that one with a certain number of teeth from the mandible in the same way as Mottos have witnessed.
And then wash your mouth with salt water or vinegar.
And if there is swelling and pain in the eyes due to heat, then sprinkle some salt on the affected area, and if it does not help, cauterize it.
The shape of the tweezers and forceps should be smooth and fine at first, with a long handle, a short handle, and a thick grip, so that they are not bent when used.
And then, with short handles that are not bent when you use them for the first time, have fine tips at the end.
And they should be made of iron from India with fine tips at the end, and in those tips some have teeth that interlock with each other and tighten strongly, and some have a groove like a bird's beak, which is good for holding.
Chapter .31.
Of the extraction of teeth and breaking of bones in the jaw.
When you must extract a tooth that is broken in the jaw, then cover that place with a bandage and leave it alone for a day or two until the place softens; and then insert tweezers or forceps, the form of which is like a bird's beak, and the tips of which are fine:
The ends of them should be fine with emery or sandpaper.
And if you do not obey him by using these tweezers or forceps, then cover the root and dig out the instrument which is called an awl, so it is a small lever whose shape is like this:
And have a thick end with a small lever, and not be bent so that it does not break.
So if the root is hollowed out, it is good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are these: the first instrument has a triangular end with some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument should be that it is triangular and has a small point at the end.
And you are helped with this instrument, having two ramps whose shape is like this: And with other instruments which will be used to shave teeth; because it is made with this instrument which is formed like an awl and is made of iron:
of the triangular end that is curved or short, with some thickness, and not be bent so that it does not break.
And you should know that the dental instruments are similar to other instruments.
The skilled artisans and craftsmen who work in this art are wise and skilled; they invented different instruments and procedures for themselves because the small ones did not know or pause on their own instruments due to the various forms of their work.
If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is broken and needs to be fixed, then cover it with a bandage at the right place for him who knows it well using the instruments and forceps we mentioned earlier when extracting tooth roots; and help yourself with these gestures whose shape is like this:
And it should be of small thickness to the little and large, and fixed or tightened with a bandage around the mouth so that it does not move or escape, until all the bone is hollowed out; then restore the place with suitable medicine for him.
But if the bone is small fracture, then fix that fracture with wood from the same tree and the blackness of it; and heal that place within until it is healed.
Chapter.32.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth next to others.
When the teeth are prominent beyond their natural place because of which shape is long, and more so in women's mouths and especially in elderly women; then cover that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose shape is like this: it is similar to a pig's ear, and made of iron from India with a sharp end.
And it should be your incision that you make on that tooth in three days because of the hardness of the tooth, and not be joined to any other teeth.
And if a prominent tooth is difficult to cut with a file, then grind it with a file of iron from India whose shape is like this:
And it should all be of iron from India; and with pointed tips, cut the tooth little by little using sandpaper which is made into needles, cutting the tooth slowly day by day with ease, so that it is not joined to any other teeth and splits. Then polish that tooth well, and fix it with a small screw-shaped nail.
And if a tooth has one side broken and the tongue hurts because of it, then cover that place with a bandage where the sharpness of that section is stuck and flattened so that the tongue does not hurt or change the word.
Chapter.33.
Of restoring damaged teeth with gold or silver wire.
When teeth are injured by impact or fall and cannot be fixed with stringent medicine; then fix those teeth with gold wire and not silver, because silver turns yellow and hardens quickly; but gold does not change in color and does not harden as quickly.
And the wire in such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that can be inserted between teeth; and the shape of the cut is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and then increase it by twice as much as the broken tooth between two good ones, or if one or both are missing, until it reaches the thread on a healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the procedure in the same way to the other end of the tooth which you started with; and tighten your grip more easily and more gently until it is not too tight.
And your tightening should be done so that the wire does not slip out of the roots of the teeth which you are closing.
And then cut off the excess wire with scissors or tweezers; add it to other waste materials and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that they do not harm the tongue. Then let that stand still as you have tied it.
If it is loose or broken, tighten it with another wire in such a way that all the time it takes to do this.
This is the shape of teeth and the figure of the repair of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as these are tied together:
And if a tooth or two are broken because of a fall in which place it hurts, and the shape of the figure of the wound is like this:
This does not make a skilled and wise person.
Some are adapted to some cause of cows' bones, and is made like a tooth; it is placed in the place where failure occurs, and is tightened as we have said, and remains fixed to that for a long time.
Chapter.34.
Of incision of the thread which is seen in the tongue and prevents speaking.
This thread which leaves some or all of your tongue exposed is due to a wound; it is intentional on the part of the person; or it happens by accident because of illness and the infection has already been established.
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient, the existing hat in the thigh; and raise his tongue, and draw back this nerve according to the thickness within which the tongue comes out from its recent.
But if in that there is any hardness or denudation, and it is standing for the consolidation of plague, then you pour oil and cut it according to the thickness within which you have cut the nerve and the nodule is dissolved.
And be careful that a fracture is not made in the bone of the flesh and that you do not cut here as it burns and brings forth flux of blood.
And then wash the scars of the incision with warm or cold water or rub them with water; and place your hand over the tongue; if it is not healed, keep the patient with his tongue in any way that it does not harden again or be infected.
But if a flux of blood occurs, place on the spot virgins water; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with common fire which is brought to water. Then heal this one and the other causes before it is healed.
Chapter.
On the extraction of the hernia let go the tongue.
Some scars are left behind the tongue, similar to a small hernia that prevents the tongue from its natural function; and very strong is that which fills the mouth.
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient, a hundred steps before the sun, and consider the swelling.
And if you make him of dark or red color, hard, to which the patient does not respond, then do not touch that one, for it is bitter.
And if it is turned to white, in which there is moisture, then you put oil on it, and cut it with a sharp knife, and cut all of it; and if blood comes out during the operation, then you stop it with virgins water, for common fire, within that it be stopped.
Then return to your work within that you have treated him with kindness, within that it is washed with cold water and salt; and heal this one with the other cure in water, within that it is healed.
Chapter.
On the extraction of two earlobes and on that which is nothing in the hole, and on other swellings.
When the swelling comes out in the hole, then it is glands that are assembled, which come out early, and they are called two earlobes, which when you heal them with water that I have mentioned in the division, and if they are not healed, then consider whether the swelling is hard, of dark color, and lacking response, do not touch it with fire.
And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch that one with fire because of the blood flowing out; let it mature within itself, and then cut it off or let her cut it herself.
And if it is white in color, thin, and the root is fine, then that one is to be cut.
And the operation on him is that you consider, in front of your operation, if he has already stopped the swelling of his tongue with complete rest, or if it has decreased; and then put his head forward, let his tongue be between your legs while you operate with a sharp instrument, which is this one:
It should be made of silver or of iron, and it should be sharp with an edge.
Then, when you press it with your hand, and the swelling appears to you, and you place the top of the tongue against it, then take oil and put it in the middle, and pull it apart from the outside as much as you can. Or another water that does not cause any trouble, and place this one on the tongue, for this is the form:
Or another water that does not cause any trouble, and place this one on the tongue, for this is the form: and it is assembled with forceps, however, the extremities of each one are sharp, so that the opening of each one is in the end of the other, pointed, which is made of iron tempered and tempered.
But if this instrument is not with you, then cut it with a sharp knife, which has this shape on one side, and the other side should not be sharp.
And then, having cut one groove, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then let the cutting of the tongue be with the water that comes out from rubbing.
But if there is a flux of blood, bring forth water that has been boiled with hemlock or with mistletoe and apply it to him, similar to those causes within which the flow of blood is stopped, and then heal this one before it is healed.
And some scars are left in the hole, other swellings than those two earlobes, and cut them according to what I have said in the cutting of two grooves.
And I have already healed a woman of a swelling that was born in her hole, which swelling was red in color and lacked response; this one had already closed her hole, and the woman breathed easily, she had forbidden him to eat and drink, and she was about to die if water were not brought to her quickly.
And this swelling had already struck so hard that it had opened two holes within which it came out through two paths.
Then I hid myself from them, and I took one of their oil bottles, and threw it at him, and a great amount of it hit him, then I cut off the tongue of him with my sharp knife, and then I put the oil into the swelling.
Then I took a great part of it off, and there was not much blood flowing out of it. Then completely I cut off the hole of that woman, and soon after, I drank water, then I did not stop cutting out those swellings one by one, and that swelling was replaced with another one, which I cut in place of it.
Then I went back and cauterized the hole of him, then I turned around and did not know what God had done for him.
Chapter.
On the cutting of a hernia when it is swollen.
When the hernia comes out with a cry, and it is swollen and long, then let it be called a bulla; but if it is thick and round in its part, then let it be called a cyst.
But when it is healed with water that I have mentioned in the division, and if you do not heal it completely, and this swelling has already become small and soft, then let you cut off what is joined roundly; but if it is long and bleeds a little, red or black in color, and does not respond to you, then fear cutting it off, for there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that one according to the method I have mentioned of its whiteness and length, then let it be with your hand that you operate its shape, and let you put oil on the new one, and pull it apart from the outside as much as you can; then cut off the end of it with a sharp knife, which has this shape on one side, and the other side should not be sharp.
But do not cut it off with that one unless you cut it according to the natural term, for if you cut it further, then it is no longer yours to speak of.
And bring the incision knife, use that which we have described in the incision of two nails, and heal it within so that it is cured.
If the patient is frightened by the incision of the knife, so that he uses engineering in the cauterization of him, his way is only with sharp water, and it is because you stop the head of the patient on his chest, and press his tongue to the instrument which we have said, and take from water which we have described in the cauterization chapter, and fill it into the concavity of the tool whose form this is:
Be the extrimity of him concavity in which medicine is paused likewise with the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument on his throat, and the patient bites upon his tongue so that saliva or mucus comes out from the mouth of it by the internal medicine, so that it does not come out of it because of any cause over the larynx of him, and prevents it.
And bring your hand to the medicine, and press it on his throat for an hour within which he is going to be blackened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take hold of him and wrap him around his neck, and submerge the hold in the medicine, and put the neck into a tube from above so that the hold adheres to that tube, and do it as many times as you get what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and let it be those days or four.
And if you want to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and let the cauterization be cleaned in the circuit of the uvula with the wrapped hold in border, and wash it with water, and cure it from outside with ointment, and within with gargles within that it is healed.
This kind of cure is more safe than incision and less feared.
Some are cured of the uvula with water which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with sub-smoking in this way: take calamus, hyssop, rosemary, sage, wild carrot, chamomile, bread, and like herbs, and combine all of them or some of them in a pan, and put vinegar into it, and boil; and the pan be well stirred with a spoon, and is placed in its place on the fire a loop, over which is placed an instrument of iron according to this way; it should be made of silver or iron.
And is put the end into the patient's mouth within that the smoke can get to the uvula over the loop, within that the uvula is going to be dimmed.
And repeat it on those spots within that are dry, and keep in mind that you do not make this cure at the coming of the apoplexy, because it would too much fit in the apoplexy, and do not make water, but declare the apoplexy from him caut.
If you do not have this instrument with you, then take a cane and form the end of it a loop, so that the patient' mouth is closed, because the loop of the cow prevents the smoke from burning the mouth.
This cure is good for health.
Chapter.xxxviii.
Of extraction of thorns and of water which adheres in the larynx and of other causes.
Spots on the larynx or thorn and any other cause.
Then take out water which of those appears, and on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue to the instrument in front only, so that it is declared to you water which is in the larynx.
And water that does not appear to you in the larynx, then make the patient vomit before the food is digested in his stomach, because it fortifies the attached cause of the larynx is форогутый by vomiting; or if he swallows a stone of naphtha or of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a sponge from the sea that is dry and hard, and rub it strongly to the tongue, and then make the patient swallow it, because when you put it into the place in which thorns are extracted, then forohutye. And if you take a snake and rub it strongly to the tongue, and is placed within the table and under the bed, then is extracted; or if you take a pig and rub it strongly to the tongue, and is placed under the table and under the bed.
If you do not fortify yourself with those causes which we have said, then use of an iron instrument according to this form:
And is larger than a nail and in the end of it is concavity which you put into his throat with ease.
And turn his head with his back to you, and keep in mind that the touch of his jaw on the larynx, so that it does not come up to him with food or water which is causing a sore throat, or that he eats it with his hand.
But nevertheless that the patient puts it in is honey, because of its knowledge of the place of the attached cause and it pushes down, and brings his hand to the instrument in his hands, all according to the quantity which is prepared for him so that he does not fortify himself.
Chapter.xxix.
Of extraction of blood which is attached to the larynx.
When blood is treated with water which we have described in the division of the cure by medicine, and does not agree to you, then consider in the larynx of the patient towards the sun, because you have pressed the tongue to the instrument which we have said.
Then if you want the blood, extract it with a small needle or with delicate gestures properly.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and put it into the larynx of the patient, and place in the concave part of the tube an iron hook, and make as many passes (within that the blood is dead and stops from the larynx) and abstain the patient all day from water.
And bring a bottle full of sour water, and work the patient' mouth with it, and wash the patient' mouth with it; and does not drink any cause from that water and let him drink it an hour later or other with his hand, because blood soaks quickly when you taste it.
If the blood is not fortified with water which we have said, then sub- fumigate the patient with cumin or with asafetida using the instrument which we have said in the sub-fumigation of the uvula.
Take water, and make it in two parts.
And is another way of operation in sub-fumigation of it, that you take a wave in which are carbon ignites and the wave is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a loop, and is formed in that loop the end of the instrument; and then remove it from it sub-fumigatio; and let the patient put his mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the sub-fumigation does not fortify itself within that you know that the sub-fumigation reaches the blood, because the blood quickly feels.
And if he does not taste, then repeat the sub-fumigation several times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat salty foods and dry fruits, and do not drink water, and so it is necessary that this regime is fortified.
And this is the shape of the instrument which has blood-sucking tips when viewed; and it is similar to tweezers at times, except that it has some curves: which is placed on the guolayro, and the extreme end of it resembles an owl's beak, which is sharpened with sandpaper, because when a certain cause occurs, it does not let go.
Chapter .xl.
In which is the summary of the surgery in regard to apoplexes and the section on them.
The apoplexes are special motets, of various kinds, according to their memory, from each in this book.
And they are diverse in piercing and sectioning them by two methods; of which one is by the species of apoplexes in themselves; and by that which they acquire from moisture.
And the second method is proper to the places in which the body suffers, because the apoplex in the head is different from that in the buttocks; and an apoplexy in the flesh is different from that in a joint; and each of them has its operation.
And some apoplexes are such that they do not need to be pierced, but require proper maturation of the pus in them or completion of their course.
And other apoplexes are such that they need to be broken when they are crossed; and do not mature according to their course, because the apoplexy, when it approaches a joint, prolongs the essence of it within until it breaks; and strong corruption occurs in the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the member; or it is an apoplexy next to a main member, and if you do not pierce it while it is not mature towards the main member; or it is next to the buttocks, then pierce what is not mature; and do not pierce the cru, from incomplete digestion, but pierce what is next to the buttocks, so that you do not reach the pre-on of it and elongate it toward the openings at the back of the buttocks, causing a fistula, or that it should be made on the edge of it and not heal. And you must know the time for piercing the apoplexy, and then it is when it has matured.
And you must know that it is mature when the pain abates and the fever ends, and there is a decrease in the pulse, and the tip of the apoplexy becomes sharp, and the other symptoms.
And because you know that piercing should be done in the pus-filled space behind the apoplexy, and that pus comes from the cure of the eminence.
And the piercing should be done at a distance from the long of the flesh or the body, if the apoplexes are in the openings of the main members or of the feet, and in the places of the ligaments, of the nerves, of the arcs; and finally, in all places that are hidden in the openings; because in those that reflect, use piercing according to that member.
And when the apoplexy is in a carnous place, then do you more quickly that you pierce it within until its course is completed; because if you pierce it before its completion, it prolongs the essence of the pus within and adds to its thickness, and hardens its lips and profundity.
And some apoplexes are pierced according to the thickness of the flesh or body; because necessity dictates, or because it is from that member.
And if you administer a small piercing, and in the great apoplexes a great piercing and a wide one or various sections according to the diversity of their size.
And other apoplexes are such that they should be cut and lanced when made; and if they are done in a place where the flesh is hardened and has a crust; and some of them, as those that occur in trots and nodules.
And of those that are not cut at all in the section have three angles; and of those that are lanced, as when it is done with a figure of an oak leaf, and of the apoplexes of the joints.
And of them are those in which round section is administered, and lunar-shaped; and resembling these.
And he who has not a cap as those of his apoplexes, because you pierce him with piercing that is superficial, or flat only.
And when the apoplexy is large and has already collected some pus; pierce it then, and not with a coyer that draws all out of it at once; cut off one part from it on this day, and another on the other day, and make it shed more often according to the graduation until it is completely removed.
And more importantly, if the patient is of a virile virtue, or female child, or small child, or old in decrepitude, because the animal spirit has its veins resolved to the exit of the pus, and strongly weakens the patient, and you open them.
Take great care with this chapter and apply your cauterization to those apoplexes; because you abstain from plagues, and consider how, if the apoplexy is small, or a flat section, then you administer the cauterization with a sharp edge or awl; but if the apoplexy is large, and the sections of piercing are thin, then you pause your cauterization in each place where they join together.
And if in the apoplexy a part of the cord is cut away or concaved in its course, then you compress it with a sharp old or a string of linen, as when you have shaved or razored, remove moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and proceed with it and cure the pus that has come out within that which is to be saned.
And if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then you administer warm water and vinegar and place a linen cloth on it, and pause it on the surface of the flow of blood that is seen.
And if the flow of blood persists, then you administer the remedy and cure and powders which I have recommended in various places of this book and division.
And if it is in the wintertime, and the place of the apoplexy is a place of motley nerves, then you put powder of wine and oil of cauterization, and pause it on those places.
And if it is in the summer, and the places are carnous, then you pause powder of wine and oil or wine and oil, and all of it be frayed within three days, as we have said; and then you remove the apoplexy and abstain from that and administer its cure according to what has been said.
And thus is the water that is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of apoplexes in general; and more specifically, according to the distinction already made, each apoplexy has its own method of cure, which we shall now consider separately.
Chapter .xli.
Of the section of apoplexes that occur in the top of the head.
In the top of the head are small apoplexes, and they are of various kinds; some contain skin within them, and others of their own nature.
And of them are blisters, and those that contain moisture resembling lemon juice. And those that contain moisture resembling milk, and others similar to it; and those that are bloody, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those that do not fear it, you must make an extension of those that do; because the fire of the latter does not cause pain.
E the operation in section of those is that you desire those am instrument the form of which see appropriately so, which is called entromes, until that you know that contain.
If what counts is moisture, then cut it by section according to length through surface section according to this shape:
And start in the section of the line .B within the line .G. Then, when the moisture has been evacuated, then scrape that part for which that moisture is responsible, and do not leave from that any cause of all, because twelve watched returns, if remains from that any cause.
And approach dunking in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill that one with the solution and let that one rest for another day, because with water it corrodes all that is covered by that film.
And approach dunking in Egyptian ointment twice and three times if you need it, within that you are confident that there is no cause of that film; then heal the infection with ointment until it is cured.
And if there is an abscess with greasy nodules, then you incise it according to this shape: in a section have shape of a club, and cut between two lips of the section and scrape that from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Or if your arm hurts you, then do so that I may tell you first.
And apparently do in the abscess with nodules of section and cure according to what you have said; and cut over an abscess with nodules is lighter, because it is little sore and little moist.
And some times so much of these abscesses that are in the head on some men whose whole is not moisture; this cause is because I incised over an abscess in the head of a young woman and pushed back the abscess like this with hard, sharp, white pain, which could not be pricked, and if at one was am that film, it would hurt that one.
Or in other abscesses on the head this is not this chapter, because if the abscesses that come to the heads of children and their roots are on the ears, then all sections of these are surface sections.
And pause the hole of those from the beginning lower than their for so that it is eased the body part of the patient to the lower parts.
Then return to cure those with water that suits them to the cure.
Chapter 32.
Of section of scrofulas which happen in the neck.
These abscesses appear in the throat and in the lips and in the arms; and some appear in other body parts.
And those that happen in the throat, and all that are born between them, and all kind of scrofula are from their own tunic, and like this, with nodules and abscesses on the head, I have described before.
The species of these scrofulas are nodules, because some of them are little hard, and those that contain moisture, and evil ones that I do not cure.
Then in that one which you recognize good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of water that is evident is appropriate to the color of grape, and is pleasant from the beginning, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the pain, and is not pus, then cut it with surface section from the beginning of the body part of the line  .G to the line  .B, and scrape that from all sides, and extract it from two lips of the tunic in an ounce, or in a sharp ounces if you need them, like this I have said in the abscesses on the head.
And it is more careful that is not incised the vein or nerve.
And it is more careful that it does not have a sharp point, which is not suitable for you in the incising or that calms the patient, and cut water that is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or arceria and prevent you from your operation, then pause in the plague with the three-pointed vinegar or other powders that stop the flow of blood, and start the plague, and let that one rest where there is pain due to the abscess, and be softened the plague and begins to rot. When the sore is incised.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then ask the patient's own saying if there is any cause of other small scrofula, then incise those and clean those.
And if it is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, then return that you do not incise that scrofula from its root. Until it returns that one with a strong fold and let that one rest within itself to prevent the disease.
Then fill the infection with young ointment which you have already lowered in Egyptian ointment and then heal it.
And if you incise that scrofula whole, then return that you adjust two lips of the infection and cut it so much as there is no superfluity of fluid.
Or if you think that there is an excess of fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then return that you do not incise the root of that one, and stretch it and administer sutures and water that is said.
And those scrofula that contain moisture, then pierce that one with a shallow hole here where it appears to you the place of maturation of the patient's head, and pause the piercing of those who are from the lower parts of the body.
Then return to administer the piercing, little by little with ointment and similar to those, so that it corrodes water that is less than corrosion. Then when you recognize that the infection has been cleaned, then you heal it with ointment of meat generation within that is healed.
Chapter 34.
Of section of the abscess with nodules on the scalp.
The little ones say this section in the headache, and I did not see any man in our town that he had done that.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Or in men who have an angle, then return that be avoided the extraction of the headache, as with water is not done quickly because all veins and major ones are here.
Or in those who have abscesses on the mouth or on two ears, when the disease is not in the can, then be careful with the section of the headache to avoid the loss that is caused by piercing.
Then when we want water, then cut the headache between three circles of the headache, or four with a small section for its width in that one is between two circles per quantity, so that the section is in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for section, because it lacks meat, and the patient' tools of blood are then.
And if the doctor is a little bit, then return that extend the tunic of the scalp with an ounce, and approach to cut the tunic until it reaches the canal, and be careful not to harm the patient' tools of blood if there is any cause of them.
Then return to incise the middle according to what we have described before; and it is significant on the section of the canal through the flame that it is from water that is its own, and by the separation of the voice.
And leave the poultice open for a while.
When the hour comes when piercing is desired, add two pieces of cord to the poultice, and cut one alone from cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the meat heal quickly so that it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the highest part of the sentence that we have mentioned, exposure, is only to see that some of these aphorisms have already turned the ring of the patient's throat, and the patient is coming to death, and the intestines are twisted, and some will cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the spot of the poultice for a certain breathing, and is saved from death.
And by water I will order the poultice to be left open until the malice of the evil is consumed; and this malice lasts for three days; and then I will order the poultice in this way, and heal it until it is healed.
And where I have seen for my sake, it is that a servant takes a knife and cuts the ring in the patient' throat and inserts one part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to the cure of him, and another sound came then as the cry of the sick, and I discovered the poultice and removed the wound the size that was in the poultice small.
And then you confessed that it had not cut a vein or anything, and the wind came out of the poultice, and healed it until it was healed.
And did not happen to the servant if he did not become ill in the mouth, and then some days returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Chapter xliv.
Of section on aphorism that happens in the ring afterwards, and is called hernias from the ring.
This aphorism named hernia of the ring is a large one according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it is second in two ways, either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one does not arise to heal.
And the accidental is second in two ways, the one is similar to nodos grasos, and the other aphorism that is made by nodulation of an artery, and in that there is fear. And do not cover that you should make a presumption to him with iron unless in the small one. And you promise that and investigate that with the finger, and if it seems like a node of fat, and is not suspended on any of the veins, then you cut that one then with the knife, and extract that with water that contains the poultice and burciclum; and if not, then examine all his being, and then heal the place with water that contains cure within that is healed.
Chapter xliv.
Of section of the spices of nodes.
The nodes have as many spices, and I have already said all the spices of them in the division.
And that you should remember thus the difference between node and exiture with doubt.
And you say that in exiture is a quality and fever and violent pains until the sweat of the superfluity ceases; and it is completed putrefaction when the hour stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Perhaps at node is not a quality or fever or pain, and it contains that one with which it takes away the lion's life from itself.
And it is second in color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a chattering and does so with water, whether large or small, and it is second in two spices, either it is fat and contains moisture, and the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
And then, when you approach the cure of node, promise that and investigate that with the instrument called intromissio, according to which it will come into its form in the chapter that is close to this.
And it is a way of inquiry of aphorisms and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and put it in the place where you think the aphorism has penetrated the ring.
And then finish your hand according to the measure of the size of the aphorism, and then extract the intromissio and consider that it is done in the trace of him.
And if the moisture is lost, whatever its color, then you cut it in a superficial section according to what I said in other aphorisms.
And if there is no moisture in the trace of intromissio, then you know that it is fat.
And dry on it in a section without a form of crust according to this form: As I taught you, and suspend that one with the knuckles, and extract the skin from all parts with ease, and if you can, save that skin on the node.
Perhaps if it is torn in the operation, it is not possible to extract that skin, and many eyes will see it, and then you extract it with ease within that it does not tear for any cause.
For if it is torn of him by a little or much, the node returns according to the measure.
And if you think that of him by a little part is torn, then completely the poultice with some corrosive sharp powder and tighten the poultice, and place it over that one that has the aphorism, and heal that with another cure within that is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you cut the two sides of him and heal that with water that contains curative.
Perhaps if the pulse is pulsating towards him, or not-pulsating, then you cut and empty the place of three times that is corrosive and leave that dried up for two days or three within that it stops the pulse; and then return to cut that which is torn from the node.
Chapter xliv.
Of the shapes of the necessary instruments in section and piercing.
The shapes are as many as the spices of intromissio, and the first is large, and the second is medium, and the third is small.
The shape of intromissio large is this:
The shape of intromissio small is this:
If it is a tool of iron, or of wood, or of the ends of a chisel with care, so that the instrument enters in the aphorisms.
And these are as many forms of experience, and they are not named differently, and one of them is called beri.
The shapes are as many as the spices, which are large, medium, and small.
The shape of great experience, shape of him:
The shape of medium experience, shape of him:
The shape of small experience, shape of him:
I say that they are in aphorisms and exiture and fistulas and bubos, so that among them are those of the bones and other causes.
And so are round, large, and triangular, as many needles with which the threads are sewn together, and they are made of citrus wax, or of wax, or of iron, or of silver, And all the others are when they are made of iron wax.
And they are the experience of black plums, which agree that by them the fistulas are opened in the concavity of those who are reflected and reflected on their reflection.
And from three spices, because some of them are long and others short, and the other herbs according to the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
The shape of the experiment is large
The medium-sized experiment is made of lead
The small experiment is made of lead
The shapes of the needles are made from different spices, because some of them are just long, and there are three kinds of spices: big, small and medium-sized.
And they are round, and they are made from three spices.
And some of them have two curves, and they are made from three spices.
And some of them have three curves, and they are also made from three spices.
All of these are necessary in their place.
The shape of a small simple needle, the shape of lead:
The shape of a large needle with two curves: The shape of a medium needle with two curves: The shape of a small needle with two curves:
The shape of a large needle with three curves:
The shape of a medium needle with three curves:
And these are the shapes of the scalpel that cut and scratch the nodes and abscesses, and they are made from three spices, because some are large, medium and small.
The shape of a large scalpel:
The shape of a medium scalpel:
The shape of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those that are sharp and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but rather so that it is made with precision in the incisions of veins or nerves, and so that it is cured of the patient's disease and achieves tranquility through the application of the ointment, which also cures the abscess by applying it to it.
And these are the shapes of the poultices, and they are made from three spices: large, medium and small, as you wish.
It is made from oil and seems like rain, it is made with alcohol.
And it is in the middle of the pointed tip and the hidden edge on the inside and outside, when you want it, so it can be used.
The shapes of the blades that are inserted between the fingers so as to pierce the abscesses and do not feel the pain, and they are made from three spices: large, medium and small. And these are the forms:
The shapes of the blades that cut through the flesh and separate it from the bone, and they are made from three spices: large, medium and small; the shape of lead:
It is made from oil and seems like rain, it is round in shape and has a certain length, and it is subtle.
And these spices of blades should be large, medium and small so that through the cutting off of the flesh from the bone at a fast pace in necessity, and when it is your first time, it is not medicine.
But you don't use those to separate the flesh from the bone all over the body, and do not use it except in the places of the skin, such as in the legs and thighs, in the breastbones, nipples, belly, and armpits, resembling their shape of the skin.
And some are made from those other instruments that are small and look like needles according to this shape; in which the flesh is separated when it is cut with phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And some are made from round blades according to this shape:
Chapter 47.
Of the treatment of men's nipples that are assembled from women.
Some are inflated by the humors of men who are prone to sleep while being covered with skin, and some are inflated, and some are assembled from women's nipples, and Roman apothomesias, hot.
And if you agree with this water, cut those that are cut by the lunar section according to this shape, from line B to line G, and then cure all the grossness, and then employ the plague of incurable medicine, and then sew the lips of the plague together, and heal those within that area.
If the nipple sways to the left and is softened by its magnitude, then it is cut in two parts, each part containing a half of the shape of the moon, and each part is sewed together with a stitch, and the pain is relieved, and then administer water that has been prepared for the suturing and the powders that are necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healed.
And if you do not agree with the incision of water that has been cut due to the disturbance of the disease, and for the flow of blood, then cut it so that it is filled with the plague that is submerged in a corrosive vinegar, and then heal those within that area, as long as it is healed.
Chapter 48.
The piercing of abscesses that comes from below the tongue.
Those abscesses that come from below the tongue are of the same kind as the scrofulae and ulcers, which contain a pus that is drained.
And those are some that contain moisture; and those that contain water cut into the lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the water has been evacuated from the abscess of the disease, then you complete it with a cotton swab and leave the area for another day.
And let the swab remain and be cured with a convenient ointment to water, as long as it is healed.
And if the abscess of the nodes is, and of the scrofulae, then you should cut it open, as long as there was a mention in the section about scrofulae that are caught.
May if the plague is extended in an area that needs to be burned, then administer it according to what has been said before.
Chapter 50.
The section of abscesses that occurs through an artery or vein.
When an artery is broken, and the knot is hardened that is formed over it, which is a long-aggrevated mass in the neck of the patient; and when the abscess is relieved with sharp tools, you feel a striding sound.
And when it is through a vein, it is rounded on the surface of the body.
And the cutting of this abscess is an error, and mostly in that which is left on the sides of the body, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, so that its treatment with iron should be avoided, and what is in the extremities, or at the top, should be avoided.
May he who is affected by inflammation of the orifice of the urethra be cut in the scrotum as long as possible and then separate the skin from the scrotum so that it can be freed from the tunic so that it is exposed.
And then place the needle and let it enter the other side, and secure the urethra with two knots, — which causes you to extract two urethras that are in the temples.
Then cut the place between the two ligaments with a knife so as not to injure the member completely while it is in the vessel, and let the apoplexy dissolve.
And then administer a cure in which there is fire within so that the ligaments are burned, and then heal that with hot water within so that it is cured.
And if it is an apoplexy caused by a vein cut, then cover that you have covered with your hand so as not to touch the apoplexy with the cord, and then insert the needle; and make a double thread inside so that you extract it from the other side, and secure the apoplexy with one ligament according to what I said to you in the ligament of the urethra of the two parts with the two extremities of the thread.
May he who fears that the thread will be extracted, then insert the needle into the apoplexy before cutting the first thread, and secure the threads in four places.
Then dry the apoplexy in its place within so that when it is wet with water, then cut the excess of the cord, and leave what is wet to dry.
Then place on it the pillow that you have dipped in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with cold water so that it is cured.
Capitol for the apoplexy that occurs by torsion of nerves.
Thus the apoplexy in the urethra and in the vein, and similar apoplexies in the nerves when they occur by percussion or by excessive work, and by similitude.
And it is done by the most in the places of the helpers or of the tongue, or in any place where the joints are inflamed.
And it is a hard apoplexy, and it resembles the color of the other members, and it is in the upper ones by virtue of its position, and when it is strong with violence, it sends through the patient similar astonishment.
And it is not an apoplexy that is gathered on the front of the body, and therefore the cord remains, and it affects all parts of the body from the front, neither from the front nor from behind.
Therefore of those that are in the joints do not cover that they are enfolded with iron, for it would be strong against them.
May he who is in the head or in the forehead with the cord with a knife. May he who has a little apoplexy, then cut it off at its root.
And if it is great, then hang it by a thread, and then cut it off, and then stop the flow of blood with sutura, and heal that within so that it is cured.
I have understood.
Of a section of apoplexy that occurs from the mouth and occurs in the abdomen.
Engrave the faces that are seen in the stomachs of those and in the other parts of the body from those same, which are called fungous by similarity to mushrooms, of which the root is thin and the top of the body is large; and also of those that are small, and of those that are magnified.
And I have seen one, and in its stomach were two similar things that seemed to be mushrooms, and there was no difference between them, white ones, with fine roots.
And the lips of those were turned toward each other, and moisture flowed from that all the time.
Then you cut off those and cut off the other one in half in the weight that is 30 pounds. and the other is 30 pounds.
And the operation of cutting them is that you consider whether he who has it is wet, and the color of those is white, wet, with fine roots; then cut them with a knife on the side, and be in the presence of fire, for what is seen from them when they are cut is driven out by three times; and if you cut off one of them, cauterize that.
And if the patient is a little bit frightened and worried, do not cut him with iron; but then take fresh lead, and string that on which has been described; and leave that for two days.
Then adjust the string of the lead so that it is not too tight, and then do not tighten the large lead within so that it is cut and falls by itself.
May he who has a thick root be cut within so that there is no cause for fear and worry, and more in the one that is in the abdomen.
It is possible that you cut off half of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then heal that within so that the plague is healed.
And be careful not to cut off a part of the body that has a dark color, and little feeling, and looks with suspicion, because that is cancerous.
And I came back to the memory of the cancer.
I have understood.
Of a cure of excellence around the navel.
Eminence of the navel is caused by various things; or by fissures of the navel that are on the abdomen, and let the intestines or intestines flow according to whether they are inside or outside; or by the blood that flows from a vein or an artery according to whether it comes from the front or from behind; or by constriction of wind in it.
May he who is caused by a fissure of the navel and the intestines flow from it, then the color of the apoplexy resembles the color of the body, and there are three pains, and then it appears in different places. And if it is by the escape of the intestines, then the place of that with you, of which we have spoken, in a more violent difference, and when you press that with your hand, it returns; and there is a lot of violence to the right side, and it is very strong.
May he who is caused by moisture, then it is strong and does not hide when you press it with your hand, neither is it forced, nor is it hidden.
And if it is by blood, then these signs are given of the apoplexy in black color declining.
May he who is caused by flesh, then it is a hard and thick apoplexy, and it remains according to a certain quantity.
May he who is caused by wind, then the touch of that is strong.
And the operation of that is that you consider if the eminence of the navel is caused by blood from an artery or vein, or wind; then cover that you forbid the cure of it, because in that is fear and worry when you are taught about the apoplexies in the chapter where I said about apoplexies caused by an artery and a vein.
And if the eminence of the navel is caused by intestines or tissues, then order that you command the patient to have his back up, and then send a tent in the entire navel, and then order it to stay upright between your two hands, and then extend a thread strongly into the navel in the same circle as the navel above the place where you sent it to the tent; and then cut off half of the apoplexy to the parts with a large knife; and then hold it in the other hand, and then cut in the circuit with a strong thread or a thistle, and do so in the way that is pleasant.
And then divide the appendix with your fingers and insert the needle into it, and if you cannot grasp it by the ligament, then pull it out with tweezers and push it towards the internal parts of the belly.
And if you have torn the hernia, then tie a knot in it; and cut off the excess.
Mayst if it is contrary to your tendon or vein, then surround that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and fit them very firmly into those two threads, in a manner of cross, the points which pass through; and then tighten the appendix tightly around the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let that point stay inside so that it can fall on its own; or cut off that part when it has thinned out and then clean it up, and then care for that wound which is covered with water inside so that it may heal.
And if the prominence of the navel is made of no meat or only of moisture, then cover what you have cut off with this ointment and destroy the flesh or the moisture, which you have torn out, and then care for that wound where the moisture is located so that it may be strengthened.
Chapter II.
Of the Treatment of Bone Fractures.
I have said, in the division, of the kinds of fractures and in what way they are treated with medicines, and that it is helpful in their treatment to reduce them by force so that they are not ulcerated; and I have said that a fracture generated during pregnancy requires great care in its treatment.
And they said that some fractures are located in places where it is possible to eradicate them completely, as when the fracture is in the breast or in the groin and similar members are removed from there, and especially when it is only beginning.
But when it is old and hard, do not cover it up, for the eye cannot heal such flesh nor have I ever seen such a thing, nor that it has come to water.
And the operation in it is that you go before and take off the patient and purge him of black cholera, and then clean it up, if it has been torn open.
And then prepare the patient for the operation with the preparation in which that part is located, and then cut off the nails of the foot with a pointed instrument, and then push back all parts with a cotton wadding so that it does not cause any trouble to the roots of the hair. And let the wound run, and do not wash away that filthiness, and squeeze out the fluid, and cleanse it with your hand or with an instrument which you have at hand.
But if you have made the wound run with a large cut of a vein or artery, then cauterize that within which the flow of blood has stopped, and then care for that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter IV.
Of the Treatment of Hydropesis.
We have already mentioned, in the division, of the kinds of hydropesis of water, and of the characteristics of each kind, in the treatment of it with medicines.
And that which is cured by force is only the kind of algorism, and it does not approach the kind of tympanist or the kind of hyposarcoma, since water is deadly.
And when you have already treated this kind of hydropesis with medicines, and do not take your medicine, then be sure that it is not given to a person who has already overcome the illness, or who has another kind of hydropesis similar to that of cough or stomachache, and in such cases do not give it to them with force, for fear is there about water.
But if you see the patient's virtue as abundant, and that there is no other illness in him but hydropesis alone, nor an infant or an old man, then the way of operating with him is this: you raise the patient between your hands, and the servant holds his leg up, pressing the water out of the foot, and then takes a stream of water according to this form:
it should be of two sharp ends long, of the sharp extremity also with a stream; but nonetheless it should be in a short length little by little, so that in the operation on him not pass into the budel, and that all of them.
And then consider if the generation of hydropesis is from within the budel, since when you cut off three fingers at a time on either side of the navel, in the middle of the foot over the heel bone.
But if the generation of hydropesis is due to a disease of the foot, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
And if the generation of it is by its own nature, then your section should be on the right side.
Do not cover that your section is on the rib on which you want to operate on the patient so that the excess does not run to that place.
And then pierce the instrument completely through it, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand to the stream between the cup and the foot, and you squeeze it out; and if the quantity is of a thumb or more.
And then pierce the cup so that the stream goes to the desired place, and it is a place of water. And then remove it and insert an instrument which has this form: it is shaped like a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or copper or lead, and at the end has a small hole, and on either side two holes, one above and one below; and its extremity is sharpened according to the form of a feather, so that sometimes:
At the end of it is an upright ring, since when the instrument touches water, then that so often as half a measure is discharged from it, for if you discharge less than that, very hard does the patient endure by reason of the resolution of his spirit, or comes to him five times near death.
But discharge that so often as the virtue of it requires, and second, according to what you are disposing of in the virtue of his pulse and the goodness of his life.
And then remove the instrument, and retain the water which is produced, since it is so often as it is retained by the rib which retains the hole that is on the cup from which it is produced, which you have described to me that you perform according to that manner.
And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates water, and discharge a small quantity of water, and let it run over a little time for fear, and do not err so that it does not run off from the water but a little.
But if you are afraid of the patient, then let a large quantity of water run, then bury him in sand, and bathe it with sweat, and wait for a long time; and care for him with drying medicines until he is healed.
And then cauterize on the stomach, and the foot is pulled back from the water, according to what I have said in it that has been mentioned.
Chapter V.
Of the Treatment of Children Whom the Bladder Does Not Puncture.
Some of the children are born from the womb of their mother, and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is straight or is not in its place).
Then place him on his back so that he can be brought to birth easily by this method according to this form:
Then put a small lead nail on it and tie it up, and you will do so for three days or three times.
And when he wants to urinate, let him go and urinate, and return again.
If you do not hold the lead nail, the urine that goes over the place may not leave this closure.
The one from which he was cut should be treated with a lead nail, as we said before, for three days or until it is enlarged.
The ones from which he was not cut are left untreated, and the cause is because of these, that man who was born with the birth mark should lift his hand to his chest; and this is not done, for semen cannot reach the mother according to its natural course, and it becomes a disease.
And the way of the operation on him is that the patient be placed on his back, and the head of the penis is extended from the patient's right side with a violent extraction, and the top of the penis at the place of the perineum is cut with a sharp knife, or so that you do not shave any part, in order that the foreskin of him comes out resembling the head of the penis, and that the birth mark falls into its place according to how it is covered.
And be careful that in your operation of a cut wound, because it is likely to happen that the blood flows out; and stop him from bleeding by applying pressure until he is healed.
Chapter LVI.
Of the birthmark that happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis and of the corruption, darkness, and adhesion of the foreskin on the head of the penis.
These birthmarks may occur on the penis and are bumps of flesh.
And one is evil, and the other is not.
Not evil, but cut it off with a very small knife and let it fall away; then apply the oil of Egypt to that spot, and there is no need to use any other medicine; heal with this.
And if the birthmark is evil, of a white color, then cut it off; but, if it is of a dark color, then apply heat to the incision and rub it.
If the birthmark is in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and one part is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then cut off the one that is outside; but if you want to keep that one, which is inside at first, until it is hardened, then heal the one that is outside, because when you heal that one, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And these things also happen in the genitals and in the foreskin that becomes dark and corrupts; then cut off all of it that is already corrupted and turning black, or that has already become corrupted; and apply to that oil made from a piece of bread with three eggshells ground up and mixed into it.
And heal that other one with any other medicine until it is healed.
If there is bleeding from the wound, then apply lunar heat according to this form:
Because two types of heat are useful, one for treating bleeding and the other for treating corruption when it has become corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is torn and completely destroyed in an hour, then insert a lead pipe into the meat of the foreskin with a hole made through it so that the urine passes through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in that which has the foreskin, and from it the head of the penis is completely separated), cut off with a sharp knife until it is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to cut those accurately, then cut off with a sharp knife any cause on the head of the penis and on the foreskin, and when it is very small, it is easily pierced by the sharp edge of the skin.
And separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a lead thread that is very thin; it will easily slide into the water and not adhere to anything else.
And heal it with vi stiptic until it has hardened.
Chapter LVII.
Of the cleansing of children and of the treatment of urine that happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not the solution for continence except with other medicines; but because it is part of our operation and our will, and because that one is especially suitable for children, we must assign this best operation and make it lighter so that it may lead to salvation.
So I say that the children do not say circumcision in some of the free nations, because they do not observe it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired by experiment that this causes many craftsmen and barbers to practice circumcision and purification with a knife and a scalpel; and they use a thread with a hook and incise with a needle.
I have seen all of these ways and I do not find any better purification with scissors, with a thread that is used in purification with a needle, because the thread that is tied around the foreskin has two ends, and the loop that comes from it falls away; and the thread that is tied around the foreskin becomes tight around it, and this causes pain unless it is cut. And the purification that is done by an apprentice, which is manual, and of which barbers make use, is not secure for the cutting of the extremities of the male member, because it goes into the hole very easily.
But in the operation with a scalpel, one can easily damage and corrupt your operation. And the loop of a child is short by nature, and such that there is no need for purification, and I have seen it.
More of the purification that is done with scissors and a thread than by cutting it with a sharp knife, for when the sharpness of the knife goes away, it is so because it goes into the hole, and therefore you should make a comparison in time; and this causes a compression of the string around the head of the penis completely, and this is where the loop does not come out; and this is how you do a cut that makes no mistake.
And the first method of operation is that you should stay with the child while it is still young, and if it is small, do not cut the string from the head of the penis until the next day.
And then place him on his back in that way, which is most likely for him to accept intelligence. And then place him on his back with the head supported and not leaning; and hide the scissors in your hand or leave them somewhere where the child does not see them and nobody else sees them.
Then put your hand on the head of the penis and blow into the loop, and pull it until it is stretched; then purify that which has been attached to it by impurity.
The shape of the forceps for dissection, this is the shape:
If the extremities are not sharp and the others are, so that the claw of the hand does not pass through it; and if the length of the two is equal to the length of two fingers joined together.
The mistake in dissection is that if you pull too much of the internal cord, all of it will come out; or, if you only cut part of it, then you should make the incision.
Then, when you have extended that to your finger tip at the joint of the hand in front of the opening; and then cut it according to the second equality.
And if you cannot hold that to your finger tip; then remove it with a blade and cut it.
If they have passed three days, and it remains swollen; then leave the hammer in place; but cut off that with ease, and cut it according to the second preparation.
And keep away from the head of the hammer, for it will not be suitable for him.
Then care for that with water which solidifies the powders we have mentioned in the treatise on the powders.
And if it has been cut too much; and you follow the incisions made by someone else; then it will not be suitable for him.
Then care for that with water which we said would heal.
Chapter LVIII.
On the Treatment of Urine Retained in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by wind due to a cold or by heat; or by poison or meat; and similar to those which we have mentioned in the division on treatments for the disease.
If the urine is not dissolved by water which we have mentioned; then make an extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be made of silver and fine leather, such as a leather tube with a long pipe at its end, similar to a palm tree in shape; and the pipe should be fine in thickness at its tip.
And the way of extracting the urine from him is that you should double the bag and fasten it on the edge of the tube by a good knot; then introduce the end of the tube into the opening of the bladder, and cut with scissors if there is any excess of the leather; and then insert it into the urethra with force.
Then make the patient lie down on his back; and immerse the bladder in water, and oil of olive and vinegar.
Then insert the tube with ease up to the root of the bladder; and then double the tube over at its end; and then introduce it into that which will go up to the bladder, and that should be done in the order mentioned above, except for meat which goes against the flow.
Then let the bag fall slowly from the leather; because urine cuts the leather short.
Then extract that and treat with urine; and use a syringe, not making it too full so as to cause pain; but relieve the bladder with a syringe, and then make the patient comfortable.
Chapter LIX.
On the Quality of Bladder-washing with a Cliff-bed and Similar Instruments.
When the bladder becomes infected or develops an ulcer; or is cut by a sharp object, and you want to distil water and medicines in it; then use an instrument called a cliff-bed, which has this shape:
it should be solid at its end, so that it is closed. And in it three holes: two from the first hole; and then three times.
In the beginning it is a round shape, in which it is said that water is trapped; and according to its quantity, add what is needed for it; but when any cause causes it to expel moisture, let it be expelled with water; and when it is expelled far away, according to the quality of the cliff-bed, which is painted with tar in the battles at sea.
Then, when you want to add moisture to the bladder; introduce the end of the cliff-bed into the moisture, and throw water at it which is thrown up by it; because the moisture is thrown into the concave part of the cliff-bed.
Then introduce the end of the cliff-bed into the tube according to what we have mentioned in the syringe; and then add moisture with water which will be thrown up by it; because that moisture will reach the bladder as much as possible, and the urine will be passed out with it.
The shape of the delicate instrument for bladdery is like this:
It should be made of silver or leather, the tip being rounded or similar to a small feather; and the tube should be fine in thickness inside.
Then make the bladder move; and add to it the moisture you want to crystallize in the bladder; and then introduce that into a double bag with a tight knot; and heat that humidity over fire.
Then introduce the end of the tinhter into the tube.
Then press your hand on your back with the moisture over the bladder; and that should be done so that the urine is passed out with it.
If you do not have a bladder, then make a circle of rope; and pierce it all around; and then introduce the double bag into those holes, so that it is twisted and tied; and then add to it the moisture with which you want to treat; and then pour oil and water.
Then you should tie that up with the instrument; and make it in such a way as to fit the bladder, and express it so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LVI.
On the Extraction of Urine.
We have already mentioned in the division on urinary disorders and treatments with medicines, and the difference between urine produced in the lungs and that produced in the bladder, and the signs of the latter.
We have mentioned urine which is produced by a catarrh; and also that which is produced by an operation.
Urine produced in the bladder itself is that which is retained in the bladder.
There are four kinds of urine: that which is kept in the bladder, that which is produced by a catarrh and is not retained; that which is produced by an operation; and that which is produced by a fever.
Then say that urine produced in the bladder is mostly in children; and of its signs is that the urine passed from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears like sand; and the patient's bowels move with a noise like that made by a horse's hoove; and then it appears as if there were drops of blood in it.
And it takes a long time for children who have had this disease to be cured, and difficult cure in the old. But in young people is partly cured by water because it is among them.
And of that for which the pain is greater and the cure is slower; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, as we approach the cure of that, let us begin with the preparation mentioned above for the treatment of the disease; because that injury prevents some wounds from being infected by the disease through inspection.
Then return the hernia to the patient's feet and press it and wrap it well so that the pain does not go down to the groin of the bladder, or jump from place to place.
Then make a cut between them well prepared, and the cushions of the patient are left there, so that the whole bladder is lowered to the area where the hernia was removed.
Then return it all there.
Therefore, if you feel the pain in that area, then immediately lie down on your back with a cut above it.
And if it does not come out all at once, then when you have well anointed that place with oil and the finger is slightly heated, if the hernia is in a child, or half-grown, and the finger is well heated, insert it into the patient'c anus. Then prepare that pain inside which is behind the finger. And slowly turn that small one little by little into the neck of the bladder.
Then press it with your finger and force it out from the area where you made the cut.
And order the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and order another minister, on his right hand, to spread the thighs at the sides, and on his left hand to stretch the cord that is behind the bladder, in the area where you have made the cut.
Then return to the first preparation, with which this form is made: and cut it in two with that finger which is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, moving towards the left of the cushion; and make a transverse cut on that pain, so that the cut outside is wide and narrow inside according to the quantity of pain that comes out there, and no more, because by pressing the finger which is in the anus the pain is relieved, and it is a painful injury.
And know that there is no pain for which the relief of pressing is not difficult with water.
And that water is like a lion with small eyes, and it is round, and its relief is somewhat difficult.
Therefore, if that is the one which has angles and margins, adjust in the split.
And if it is not so easy to relieve with a finger, then when you press it or stretch it gently on that place, where the extremity of it reaches, slightly and carefully, so as not to let go; or insert from behind an instrument with a curved tip.
But if you cannot do it with your finger, then make a small cut on it, and if you see blood flow, press it with vinegar that is slightly heated.
But if the pain is greater than one, at first press your hand to the opening of the bladder, and cut it slightly; and then press a little water; and seemingly, if there are more than two drops,
And if there is great pain, at first cut it with a large section, because it happens to the patient that two things cause it: or because it is old, or because it has received continued urine, for that place is not completely solid.
But administer to it outside what is inside, or insert into it the instrument that breaks it from within, taking out that part in pieces.
Therefore, when you have finished your work, then fill the wound with water from an aloe plant and from dragon's blood, and strengthen it. Then put a linen cloth on the wound with oil of roses and some water to be rubbed together, or rose oil and salt water, so that the blister is broken by itself.
Then return the patient to his seat, and do not remove the bandage for three days.
And when that wound is cleaned with water and some oil, then treat it with the medicines Diafinicon and Dibazic for three days, as well as with a solution of salt water.
But if the blister is broken with cauterization, and it looks like the pain is in the bladder, and it causes urine to be lost (and it is recognized by the exit of the pain from the bladder), then insert the finger into the wound and force out that pain, because if it remains, it will cause the bladder to corrode and putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with salt water, water and oil, and opposite to all kinds of medicine, with water that brings out the cure from within.
Then during the hours of all the cures you have mentioned, return both cushions and adjust the medicines that were placed on the area.
And if the pain is small and it is in the middle of the penis, and it is stuck there, and urine loss is prohibited, then cure that with water which I will now describe to you before the cut is made, because three times this treatment has prevented a cut; and already water is used, and it is to be hoped that if you have a piercer with iron, of which this is the form:
of a triangular tip, taken in hand, held between the thumb and index finger, placed at the end, firmly gripped between the thumb and index finger,
Then firmly hold it with your hand and place it against that part so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the penis, piercing with ease at the point where the piercer enters that pain. Then return the piercer to your hand in that small pain, and you pierce it from the other side with ease, because urine is sometimes absolute.
Then press your hand on that part which is outside the end of the penis, because it is curved, and it is a painful injury, and the patient is healed.
But if this treatment does not suit you for some reason that prevents it from being used, then hold between your hand and the penis a piece of string slightly longer than the length of the penis, and hold between the other hand the opposite end of the string. Then cut that pain on the penis between the two strings. Then remove it. Then unbandage and clean up the wound.
It is not necessary to hold it between the fingers, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage above, because when the string is loosened, the pain goes away, but the cord returns to its place and hurts.
And it is necessary that you hold the string above, so that you raise the cord to the sides, or return to its place as it did before, and hurt the wound in that way.
Capital.
Of woman's pain.
Pain in women is rare.
But if you have any of that pain, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that the woman was very heavy.
And the second is because you do not find a good woman who can expose herself in front of doctors when she is pregnant, or is a married woman.
The third is because you do not know this art well, mainly the operation of the hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the section according to the pain in women is far from the location of the pain, so it causes great pain and fear.
And if necessity forces you to do this, then know that you take a good woman, and she is hidden.
And if you are deprived of that, then know that you take a subtle and clever woman, or present an elderly woman well-versed in the craft of midwifery, or a woman who has mastered this art.
Therefore make her present, and order her to do everything you will send her to do, from the inquiry about the pain to the beginning; which is that she guards herself well, for if she does not hide her desire in her heart, she may be caught by the pain.
Therefore, if you make her present, hide her from him, and then order her to write on herself.
And if she is not pregnant, then order the midwife to put her hand on the cavity of the illness and feel for the pain, because she places her left hand over the bladder, and feels for the woman with good care.
And if you make her present, then know that she kindly hides herself from the orifice of the bladder at the beginning of her labor, until she reaches the opening of the vagina.
And then she writes on herself the position of the head of the uterus at the opening of the vagina, and feels for the pain in that position, and her hand does not leave the woman's leg.
And the section should be little at first; and then she puts her hand on that section, and if she feels the pain, then adjust the section according to the quantity, for which I know that the pain will move away from her.
And you should know that the signs of pain are many: some are small and sharp, and some are long and round, and there are spikes.
Therefore, you should know how many species of water there are for the purpose that you want to make on this water.
And if you want to stop the bleeding, then adjust in the virulent area three times and let her go for an hour until it stops, and then return to your operation before the pain disappears.
And make sure you prepare the instruments that he says in the extraction of pain in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
And if you want to stop the bleeding, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the uterus that is placed, then put a powder on the area and stir it with a sharp instrument, and do not repeat this water; and leave the pain, and do not extract the blood, for a strong woman will die. Then heal the wound.
Therefore, when the pain of labor begins to ease, then the location changes, and you return to your operation before the pain disappears.
I have completed 62.
Of section on hernia.
Hernia is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white skin, which leaves the string of the genitals containing the blood, and it is called cyphac.
And some are in the proper skin, which nature prepares at the beginning of the birth, until it is separated from the other one, and it is the string of the genitals between the white skin that we have mentioned, and it is not water but tar.
And the generation of this hernia is because of the injury that happens to the genitals, so that this substance is infused into them, and sometimes it happens due to impact made on the genitals.
And this moisture has no color, for its color is turning to yellow or red, or it is black and fermenting, or it is white and watery, and it is water that is more.
And the signs by which this addition of water is recognized are these: for if it is in the white skin that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round, a little turning towards the length, so as to form the figure of a cow, and appears the genitals, because the moisture contains all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper skin, then the swelling is round at the beginning of the birth, and thus one judges that it is another cow.
And if the moisture is between the string of the genitals and the white skin, then he feels the pulse.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture in the swelling by its edge, then examine the shape of the swelling at the beginning of the edge; and according to the water that oozes out of it, judge from that what is inside.
Therefore, when we come to heal you with this medicine, let us first order the servant to bring a warm cloth for your feet; then we will cut off his clothes.
Then let him lie down on his back for a little while, and place some warm sheets over him.
Then let him sit on the left side of you, and order the minister to follow with his right hand, which extends his arm to one of the two sides at the string of the genitals and at the beginning of the miracle of the belly.
Then take a knife and cut the string of the genitals from one side to the other at their length, within the fifth inch.
Then the section should be made according to the rule of distance from the line that you wish to make on the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the cyphac.
Then remove it, and observe, and remember for such a thing that you do not cut it; and your removal is made in such a way that it is suspended on the birth of another cow, and carefully examine your removal according to the quantity that you can make.
Then pierce the cyphac completely with water through a large hole, and remove all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the section by one finger, and extend the cyphac to its edge; and do not touch the string of the genitals together, and cut the cyphac in that manner, as you can make it. Then cut it into pieces of equal size, and especially the middle part, for if you do not scrutinize carefully the cutting of him, the water will not return.
And if you send him away from the string of his genitals in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cyphac, return to him, and then adjust the two lips of the string of the genitals with a stitch, and then heal that one along with the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find that the cow is corrupted by another illness, then know that you destroy the vessels that are attached to the suspension, and remove him from there, and then heal him with water that we have mentioned.
And if the water is added in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part according to how you have cut the other one; and if it appears to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E appropriately you abstain from the drink, and enter into the sections of the lamb immersed in oil or in rose oil; and place before another piece of cloth that you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the wonder of the belly; and remove open folded cloths and powders, and lie those open.
And appropriately two cloths are pressed and are humped with wool according to this appearance; and the extremities are rubbed by a pad or wet wool, and are attached to the stretch of the breeches of the breeches, and the one of the extremities takes hold of the buttocks from behind the two, and the second takes hold at the split of the pantyhose, and the two extremities on the two genitals and two other extremities on the two chaps, and all the stretch is adjusted in the breeches of the breeches.
And some used to treat this hernia artificially by surgery in place of surgery with scissors; and it is because you take a sharp knife cauterization and burn it on that thread of the genitals, and is lit according to what we have mentioned within that is discovered the white capsule containing the water, and then you do cauterization according to this form: and it is assembled in Greek letters.
And appropriately pierces that capsule, and is lit within that all the moisture be expelled.
And appropriately extends the capsule with nails, and scrapes it with nails, and scorches it with sharp cauterization; and scrape that according to what is possible within you so that you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself from the fire that the heat does not touch you.
And you know that this operation is more safe and more distant from the flow of drink, and better than an operation by surgery.
May if at you causes opposition to the flow of drink in the hour of surgery or in the hour of cauterization, or the flow of drink, then cover that you cure what opposition does to you by water, with treatment which is said.
May if the patient is a bit nervous and does not expect the second operation for its horror, then administer the piercing according to what I have mentioned above water; and it is when it is confirmed that you, by water that we have spoken of, that this hernia is watery.
And then cover that you make the patient lie on a high shelf, appropriately pierces the apoplexy in the lower part of it with a blade, and place the piercing according to the length of the body.
And be the wide opening within that runs all the water.
And appropriately places on the area pad and lays it, so that runs the water. And appropriately cures that within that the plague is healed.
May if opposition is to the flow of water in that hour you pierce: and water is not made except by water which the white capsule in the orifice of the plague causes opposition and prevents the ingress of water, then cover that you insert into the plague with a sharp instrument through which the water is drawn from the water droplets, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the constriction of the plague a small one.
And you know that water returns, and is gathered appropriately after several months or years; and when it is added, then pierce according to that method of manual treatment, for the patient will pass its days.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Of Surgery on Inflamed Hernia and the Treatment of It.
You know that in surgery on this hernia is a lost fear of becoming worse in the worst dispositions; but to me it is seen the dismissal of it and being saved by it, for that one is better.
I remember the operation on that and the spices of apoplexes.
Therefore, I say that the apoplexies are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are joined together and it is made by droplet causes: or because of acute excess of urine which is discharged from the genitals, or because of impact.
And it is the color of the apoplexies according to the color of the body, and does not change in pain, and is a heavy apoplexy.
And a heavy apoplexy is clotted, whose color is dark, and it does not feel to the touch.
And some are made by the nodulation of the arteries, and by the swelling of those so that it is already perceived the recurrence of it, or because of the swelling of veins.
May that water is caused by the swelling of arteries is known by the dispersion of the apoplexy when you press it with your fingers, and does not cover that you touch it.
May that which is made by the swelling of a vein is not dispersed by it any cause due to pressure with your fingers.
And it is possible that on this species be made surgery and on the other meats; and it is because you scrape the thread of the genitals, and appropriately are brought the fire to the splits of it, and pull apart those of the vessels, and tie them together, and scrape them together as much as you can.
Therefore, if the water is already united with those meats, then cover that you remove the water and scrape that.
And if there is adherence within any cause of the capsule, or between water that is between the veins, then cover that you release all that adherence and scrape that by round incision.
May if it is a birth of meat in the place of the adherence that is behind, then cover that you scrape all that is from it, and pull out the water as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the plague with infused wool in rose oil and wine; and appropriately cures that by the other treatment within that it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
Of Treatment of Hernia That is of the Virgin.
It has an apoplexies wrapped in a wrapper that resembles the softening of the testes, and it is difficult to make exercise or walk on the patient's back.
And in the treatment of this malady is by fear because of water from which the recollection of it precedes.
However, cover that I say surgery on that according to that it makes manual treatment first.
And I say that you make the patient lie on a high shelf; and appropriately bring the suspending strings of the testes to their splits; and appropriately pull together the thread of the genitals with your fingers, with the bayssels that are joined to the pole; and have other servants who do so quickly.
And appropriately scrape with a blade that is made by transverse section in the right of the vessels within that the vessels are discovered.
And appropriately scrapes from all part as much as you have said by the dispersion of arterial tissue, which is in the veins.
And appropriately puts in those a needle in which there is double thread, and ties that at the first place of where it happens vit; and ties that another, seen from the back. And appropriately scrape those at the middle place by right section according to the length of the body, and pull out that which is added to the noxious and corrupted fluids.
And appropriately cures the plague by treatment of other plagues that you wish to be born so that they fall those vessels that burn between the two genitals, for it is not bad because of water.
May if it happens vit to all the bayssels, then cover that the testes are pulled out or that the testes by water are separated from the vessels, for it is deprived of all nutrition because of the cutting of the vessels, and they become withered, or that it does not grow well on them.
Chapter .lix.
On the treatment of hernias of the intestine.
The arrival of this hernia is by section which ends up being extended over the abdomen from the cut of the midriff, so that by dividing the intestinal loops from that rupture you place some of them.
And this rupture is either of the midriff or of excision from it, and such things happen for different reasons: either by percussion, or by noise, or by a cry, or by an unusual elevation for some heavy cause, or by similitude.
And the sign of this, when it is by extension from the midriff, is that it happens little by little in a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess inside the hernia which compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is by section from the midriff, for at the beginning it causes intense pain suddenly; and it is an abscess different in appearance near the navel, and there is an odd sound from the intestine, and the skin rubs against the openings of the hernia.
And some are forgotten about by the intestine, and it is called this hernia of the intestine.
And some are made to swell, and some run in the intestinal loop, and here it is held back, and it causes great and severe pain of the patient's foot, and sometimes it leads to bad pain and more so when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these diseases of the intestine, be careful that the cure should not occur in that area.
And the way to operate on it is that you order the patient to return the intestine to its cavity if you obey his return, and place a cushion between them at the opening of the hernia. And place your hand over their chest, and raise their legs.
And then tighten the rope which holds the testicles at their openings, and cut the rope long. And then place it between two blades according to how you want to make the section wider for them.
And if the section according to the quantity that is possible that from it has been forgotten about.
And then cut off that hernia with the rope which holds the testicles at their openings, within each opening of the midriff.
And then you insert the finger in it that holds the testicle, in it that is between the midriff, which is left to hold the rope of the testicle, and in the second midriff, and free from the attachment that is behind the testicle.
And then tightly with the rope which holds the testicles at their openings, and stretch out the white midriff over it on the left hand side, and raise the testicle to the opening of the section; and order the servant to extend it towards you and dissolve the attachment that is behind in a complete way.
And search with the fingers that whether there is any cause of the wrapped intestine in the white midriff. But if you do not find any cause from it, then return to your patient' body.
And then cut off in the opening of the hernia by section from which runs blood and pain, as we have described above.
And then administer submergent wool in oil, and put it on the plaga; and administrate the thread that we have described (and sometimes the white midriff is cauterized, which we have mentioned above when there is a flow of blood, because some happen there) and leave the thread inside so that it falls.
But if the cure has delayed, then add to it a little oil, and place it on the hernia so that it falls according to what we have said.
And then heal the wound with another cure of wounds within that is healed.
Chapter .lxi.
On Ventilated Hernias.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been kept on the cure of it to make it possible.
And the first said that it is done like this that we have described in the hernia, which is that you place the vessels appropriately on it with ease; and dry them in their place near the abscess with oil, so that they fall.
And heal the wound as we have described within that is healed.
Chapter .lxi.
On the pain that happens in the legs.
And some break in the legs as we have said above, and leave the place.
And do not blame the genitals for any causes of the intestine, if you do, it is little; and return from them at all times.
But if the time is prolonged with it, it causes a small fracture in the midriff within that sends the intestine into the midriff; and this happens because the midriff is extended as we have said above, and then it becomes soft and the place is inflamed and it starts to ooze.
And the cure of it is by cauterization as the description of it precedes.
And some are cured by the way we have described: that is, let the patient ride between your hands, and dry up the place of the abscess with oil by section according to the quantity of three threads.
And then tighten the white midriff that is below the hernia within that is revealed.
And then pick up the rope and place it on the hernia's prominent place, and place it on the navel's side.
And then cut the two prominent places of the rope's ends at the midriff' end, and adjust them with a stitch between them.
And then pull the end of the rope, and do not cut off the midriff from it all, or extend the testicles, or any other cause as you would like to know in the treatment of hernias of the intestine.
And that is healed with the cure of wounds, and when you cut off the threads, clean it up and restore the wound within that has been hardened; for the midriff contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to being saved.
Chapter .lxi.
On Softening the Testicles.
In some men, the testicles are softened by oil as the flesh between them is also softened, and it is forbidden to look at it.
Then it is necessary for him who requests treatment that he let the patient lie on his side, and then he will fold all the skin which is soft over the natural skin, and he should close two lips to the suture.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the soft skin with three or four stitches and secure it firmly.
Then sew between the sutures; and then treat for the treatment of other wounds within so that they are healed and the nails fall off.
Chapter .lxxxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration is forbidden by our law, more so because it involves the removal of an organ important for reproduction; therefore, it is necessary to recall this practice only in two cases. The first is when it is necessary to determine whether a person has been poisoned by another; the second is when we need to castrate other animals for their benefit and for our own, such as pigs, horses, or animals similar to them.
And therefore I say that castration should be done in two ways: either by cutting the testicles off or by making a section with a scalpel.
More so in that which is done by cutting off the testicles, the path of the operation is that you make a cut on the animal's tail, so that the testes are soft and loose and hanging down. Then take those with your hand within so that they are firm and do not appear with the touch.
More so in castration by a cut and section, cover that you have the animal and press the skin of the testes with your left hand.
Then remove the suspensory, and sew on each side with a single suture so that the two sides are joined together.
Then sew up those pustules that you may have torn. And do not leave any sutures over the cipha for a long time, but rather remove the sutures from the cipha slowly.
This method of castration is better because it is done by cutting off the testicles, and thus there is no cause for the animal to desire coition.
Then treat the wound within so that it heals.
Chapter.lxxx.
Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is due to two causes: the first is when the space between the testes is cut off or narrowed down, which produces a female figure because there are no testes; the second cause is when there are both male and female genitalia present.
And some of those who suffer from hermaphroditism have urine in their testes.
More so in women is one kind: and that is because the woman's genitals are located below the testes, which are of a man; but the female's genitals and two testes are above them.
The treatment is of three kinds: with two men and one woman. And it is because you should sew those parts together so that the odor of that person does not remain, and then treat those with a treatment for other wounds.
In the second kind of man, in which there is urine in the testes, there is neither treatment nor operation for him.
Chapter.xxi.
Of piercing and flesh-eating because of women.
Piercing that is strong and natural should be done with care so as not to cause harm, and it can be done if necessary for certain reasons; some women also have flesh-eating due to a certain infection that causes it to spread, and thus it is necessary to treat it with care.
Then remove the excess of piercing with your hand or with oil, and sew up.
And do not leave it unsown, especially at the base of the hair, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
Then treat those with a treatment for wounds within so that they are healed.
More so in the case of raw flesh is flesh that grows out from within it, and it is strong enough to break away according to the appearance of hair; therefore, we should sew those parts with sutures as we do with piercing, and then treat them with a treatment for wounds within so that they are healed.
Chapter.lxxii.
Of the treatment of biliousness.
Biliousness is when a woman's genitals are not pierced or are slightly pierced. It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to the malady that preceded it, and that person is caused by raw flesh or a subtle or strong suspension.
It is done either in the base of the mother or between her legs or in the pus above or below her; it is prohibited to go out or to engage in sexual activity or to get pregnant, and it is strong enough to prohibit these things.
The knowledge of that person is acquired by careful observation of the mother, if the opposition is apparent, probably so; but if it is not apparent, then carefully question that person with the fingers or with a stick.
More so if the opposition is by a subtle suspension, and it is between the two lips, then carefully cut and break it up.
It is because you pause between the two lips with your fingers, and then pause the stick that points to either side in front of them.
The woman is on her side, with her legs spread open, and then carefully cut the subtle suspension that has broken out and the opposition that has opened up.
Then take wool and sew it on with oil and pause that person in place, and mark the spot with a man each day so that the place does not become fixed.
More so if the suspension is thick and strong, then sew it up with a blade of iron or with a leaf of mirra.
More so if the opposition is due to raw flesh, then hang that person by a rope, and sew it up.
And they bring to you medicines that stop the flow of blood due to a bite, as well as headache, and blood of dragon, and ences, adjusted to milk of one side.
Then administer a wide, blunt cannula made of lead so that the wound does not become fixed quickly.
Hold that person for several days and administer a warm compress.
Then treat that person with the other treatment of consolidation within so that it is healed.
Sometimes in the native nature of other meats, and then sew up according to this method. More so if that is due to a seizure of crampy flesh, and the crampy flesh in the mother has not been caused by eating anything in a particular way.
Chapter.lxxiii.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and of the pain that occurs in the female's genitals.
Hemorrhoids are those of the orifices of small veins that occur within, and when they are caused by the continuous flow of blood, they are painful; and when hemorrhoids are old, they are painful.
I have already said in the division of these kinds into three classes: those who receive treatment and those who do not receive treatment.
Then I say that hemorrhoids and thrush are when they occur in the base of the mother and do not appear to be caused by anything; in those who do not receive treatment, there is no cure.
May those who are in the mother's orifices where there is sensation, be treated.
And when you place the woman in a bath and rub her with scalding water, or with rough cloth, and cut those with razor blades.
Then sprinkle on them the blood of a lamb from one of the powders that you have cut with poison, thus in an instant and like a shadow, they will escape.
Then tie their feet for an hour, and then place them into boiling water.
And if the blood continues to flow, then prepare for them a decoction of mustard and of scorching pepper and of garbanzo and of other things.
Then take flour from the oven and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a paste with water on their two hands.
And if the blood has been cut off, then it is well; and otherwise, make them adhere to two vents, and make a cutting on their nipples.
Then take wool and immerse them in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the honey of honeysuckle until it is well, and then treat the wound with ointment; and then treat the wound with oil within that it is healed.
Then treat that within it is healed.
Chapter. 57.
Of the piercing of the birthmark on the mother.
Special kinds of birthmarks come to the mother, such as warts and pustules and ulcers and scabs and sores and other birthmarks. And I have already mentioned these diseases and the kinds of those and their remedies in the division.
And if you ask me in this treatise about the piercing of the mother's birthmark that you heal when it is born, and if you want to know how to perform the operation.
Then consider if the pain of the birthmark in its beginning is acute with percussion and fever, and sometimes that swelling, then do not pierce it, and treat that with water that helps with maturity until the acuteness of the accident passes.
Then when you have made the woman lie on a platform that has two platforms; and she leans on her two feet and spreads her legs, and pauses her hands below her belly, and ties one to another with a rope that is convenient.
Then the midwife follows from the right side and administers the instrument with which she pierces the mother's orifice, the shape of which will be determined according to those causes that you will do.
And when you want to administer this instrument, then place the midwife's hand on the woman' s belly, and that with which the instrument enters into the mother is not more than the midwife' s hand and the patient' s belly. If the instrument is larger than the midwife' s hand, then place powder on the texture of the hand of the midwife so that it is prohibited for the instrument to enter into the hand of the midwife.
And when you place the vessel that is on the right side and that the minister holds the instrument, and turns the vessel until it enters into the mother' s orifice.
And when the excitement occurs, and it is touched with the hand and it is wet, then do not cut off those deves from the head of the patient with a sharp blade.
And when the pain has been relieved, then place on the skin a warm cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil and leave it until the scar is white.
Then wash the mother's hair with clean wool dipped in water in which lavender flowers have been boiled.
Then it is healed after two days by applying to it the ointment that you mix with water until it is well.
Some women wash the mother and the baby with water in which honey has been dissolved, and apply to it the oil of a long-hair plant, and return to the ointment.
And if the pain is within the mother who has been washed, then do not pierce it, treating that with water that I have mentioned in the division.
Chapter. 57.
Teaching midwives how to apply the piercings of the mother’s birthmark in a natural way when they are pregnant according to the following figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes in the beginning of the delivery of a natural child by signs of her, and it is when you see the woman express herself with open legs and smell the air, and over that is covered by water that comes to her from the part, and hurry up the birth, then know that this part is a second natural figure, and its expression on her head, and the second one hanging or suspended from her navel.
Then when you see those signs, then know that the mother’s belly is contracting so that the embryo may drop slightly from her head, and give it to her the second time, and it is shaped by those superfluities with good shaping.
Then that other part is not natural and not worthy, because when the embryo is expressed on its legs and the navel is expressed in front of her head and her legs, and the mother’s hand on one side or on her neck, for example: or is expressed on her head and the mother’s hand, or is hung on her navel, and hard it turns over her shoulder, and like those not worthy figures.
A necessary cause is that the midwife be wise and subtle in all these causes, and keep from error and deception.
And I have shown you all the figures, and which one is in those because it is signified by water and stands on it.
When the birth is expressed on her head by natural excellence, and that is violent to the woman and difficult, and sometimes its virtue has been weakened, then make a cut on her, or what the women have, evaporate her hair with fenugrec powder and olive oil.
Then the midwife enters between her two legs and cuts it slightly with a small knife, or dry that with her fingers until it is well. Then press the mother’s belly until the birth occurs.
If it does not express, then the woman is crisped with mucilage of seeds and mucilage of fenugrec in dressmaking.
Then order it, and order that it be crisped, and have her sneeze, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour, because the birth is often delayed.
And if the two more of the birth are sneezing at the beginning, then reduce those with ease little by little. If you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a platform and raise her legs, and if it is difficult to get up, then tie her feet to the platform; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall down.
And if the two more are not turning inside out and killing the birth, then cut those off and pull the baby from its navel with equanimity, because that birth is often delayed.
When the fetus emerges on its feet, then cover it with something to keep it warm and, little by little, turn the fetus over, and then tie it, and then take one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
Mayst when it is born between the legs, then order that it be pressed and made to vomit; for if God wills it, there will be no need of an abortion.
And if it is not born in that way, then return the small fetus little by little until you place it according to its natural figure; for if it is returned like that, it will be born in the wrong way.
And if it is forbidden to cut in all places that I have recommended, then take a line of oil and a solution of salt, and strike it all together well, and place the thread of the cord from the woman's pubic bone, the lowest part of her belly. Then make that cut in running water, so as to achieve a good incision.
And when the openings of its legs become less painful, then make it sweat with mint and apply pressure to them. And when the sweating stops for an hour, then make it cut on a cutting board, and then make it sneeze and open its mouth; remove what comes out, and press little by little at the lower opening of the woman' belly, because the fetus will soon be born.
The emergence of the fetus in a lateral position hanging from one of its feet. Mayst be prepared for the woman to lie on her back; but if she cannot do so, then raise her and let her go down.
And if she cannot go down, then make her lie on her back and strike with violence between her legs; and administer the remedies that I have recommended and that you know well.
And if the child is born, then make it cut on a cutting board, and study its reduction; tie the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and order her to press herself little by little so that she does not give birth in the wrong way.
The emergence of the fetus on its back, with its feet and feet spread; its belly is against its mother's side. Mayst hold the child's body, and gently turn it little by little; and mayst do so with ease.
And when it is tied, then place it on the string that I have recommended of oil and mucilages.
Then order that it be pressed little by little, and when the eyes open, then make it cut on a cutting board and order that it be inclined to the right side, and order that it be pressed; and make it sneeze with ease. Exit of the fetus prepared over its side.
When it is necessary to give birth to the fetus according to this method, then take care; and you shall cut the second one with your knife little by little until you achieve its evacuation of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the woman' face and her neck, then you shall cut it with your knife so that it does not hang on and die.
Then place the fetus in the openings from inside out until you stop it; and order the woman to press herself a few times, and if God wills, it will be born in the right way.
Exit of twins or multiple fetus. Know that twins are rare, and sometimes they are three or four; but this is strange, because there is a natural cause for it; but when there are more than four, they die in the womb.
And when it comes to the multiple fetus, know that they are often multiplied; one is born in the usual way through the mother' belly; another is born by natural delivery as a result of an accident; and some are born in the wrong way because they remain inside the womb too long.
And if the delivery is difficult and it comes to water that I have mentioned because of the unusual figures, then take care of those as well because they are difficult to deliver.
And if the woman is subtle and gentle, and with patience, and is clever according to all figures; prepare it gently for her health.
Remember that man is made from a fetus in the mother' womb; and he is born when it is ready.
Some are formed in one, two, three, four, and five, and some are not formed until six, seven, eight, nine, ten, and a woman who has an abortion at six or more is said to have caused it with her hands.
And when this happens, mayst know that science is the reason for her strength because she was not afraid of that small appearance of water; and therefore pause there until you see it.
Chapter LXVII.
On the Extracting of the Fetus When It is Dead.
When you care for the dead fetus with water that I have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not born, then certainly use an operation with force; but consider if the woman is of sound health or not; because it is a loss for her.
Then the woman should lie on her back; and her feet raised, and her head inclined downward; and her legs separated.
The minister should hold the child's two parts or its head in the woman' side so that it does not extend itself before the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and a solution of salt, and of fenugrec and of the seed of fennel; and add to it.
Then moisten the woman' body with these oils and solutions; then place her hand easily on the mother; and search for the child's head where its nails are.
And a convenient place in it: then consider if the fetus is prepared to cut its head off; and you shall cut its nails with your knife, or its neck, or its tongue, or its palate, or its beard, or its collarbone, or the places near its shoulders, or its sides.
But if the release is over its feet, then place it in the penthouse; or between its shoulders.
And when he has the oil in his right hand, and sets the curve of his palm on that place between the fingers of his left hand, and enters his hand with ease and keeps the oil in some of those places which we have said, before it reaches the cause of the pain.
Then place and keep another oil in the position of his palm, or third if necessary, so that it is attracted by gravity, and not drawn out according to the recipe so much only.
And so it is useful at first, so that the inflammation of him is relieved thus as soon as it is made in depth the eradication of him.
And when in him that is between them that the extraction is softened; and if some part of him is retained, then when the mother unsets some of his fingers so as to say a word about it with oil, and enters them carefully and stirs them with those hands which we have said, and returns them into their place.
And if the part of the fetus is outside, then the fingers are exchanged between the places which we have said, and made so that all the fetus is removed.
And if the hand is inflamed on the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the curvature of it, then when it is wrapped up well over that; and take out that part before all are removed, and cut that or at the joint of the hand or at the knee.
And so you can make the other hand and feet.
And if the head of the fetus is large, or happens to it by the curvature in the inflammation, or is in the water, then when you enter between the fingers spined and cut off the head and extract the water, or dislodge that with an instrument which is called "alundat", the shape of which will come to the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which is near this.
And in the same way if the fetus is of large head by nature: and then when you cut that with an awl or alundat, as we have said; and take out the bones with pliers.
And if the head is inflamed and curved by the furcula, then cut it in so that the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
And if not complicated, and does not obey to inflammation, then you cut the head soonest according that at your service is possible.
And if the entrails of the belly are pomphous or in him, then you cut that part in so that the moisture which is in it runs out.
And if the fetus is on top of his feet, then the attraction of him is light and its direction to the mouth of the mother is also light.
And if the fetus is curved by the belly and feet, then when you extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the belly and feet in so that the water which is in them runs out.
And if the other members are still alive and turn back the head, then the mother puts her left hand; if the mouth of the mother is open, then she enters her hand in the front of it, and turns that to the mouth, and throws that with the fingers within, and throws those inside.
And if the mouth of the mother is curved by swelling, and it happens to it by the juice which we have said, then when not disturbed it; in advance when administer a fluid that is moistening greatly. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with water which softens and moistens.
And if the fetus is on top of his rib, then when possible it is, let him be cut out: and water which we have said to keep the live fetus.
And if water is not possible, then cut that in pieces, and extract it.
Then there is no cause remaining within the second.
And when you have finished all your operation, then administer water which we have said of the cure in the swellings by swelling; and let those things happen to the mother which happened before.
And if it happens a flow of blood from the mouth, then send that in strict water and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in her womb which had a dead fetus, and another child was found to be pregnant on that same day; and the other was a dead fetus. And it happened soon to another woman who had a swelling in her womb by swelling, and it swelled within so that the fetus was raised up; and she began to feel pain.
And I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, and the plague did not become fixed.
And then I put on him a few plasters of strong attraction, and drew out an arm, and passed some time, and drew out another arm; and I was astonished at this, for in the womb there was no arm.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
And then I cured the plague, and extracted from him some bones; for the existing woman in her own mind, and I have worked with that method for a long time, and corrected that little arm.
And I did not consider it strange, but that water has science and helps to the mother's illness which is treated by artificial means.
From the shapes of the instruments which are necessary to extract the fetus.
Shape of turning around with which the mother is turned around:
This is the shape of strength in which the points are fitted, and by that fitting the points are two turns in two ends of a spike; and it is used to turn the skin around. And yet this turn is useful when it is put gently with caution; and it is made or of wheat or of oats or of barley.
And the length of each stalk is a palm and a half; and the width of each is a palm and a quarter, and the height of each is a palm and a little less. And the lengths of those two stalks are adjusted to that same type of stalk which is already closed, of which the lengths are the greater part of a palm and a little less, and the widths are two palms, or a little less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened by those two prescribed turns; and you make those turns with your hands.
Other shape similar to that more subtle and more light:
Be made of wood or of iron according to appearance. However, at the end of it there are two additions, and the length of these additions is a palm, and their width is two fingers.
And when you want to cover the lower part, then place your hand between the legs so that they are hanging down, and make a cut here. Then return your hand to the instrument in such a way that it is grasped according to the quantity you want of the mouth of the mother opening so that the needle makes its passage that you wish.
The shape of the turn, which they said the ancients:
Shape of a push, which is pushed by a push:
Shape of a hammering, which is hammered on the top head:
It is assembled with forceps at the end of it, several times, and some are forged long with the same type of forceps according to this shape, several times, which are dented here and there on the part that is to be cut, and marked and contoured. Shape of a small hammering:
Shape of an unsharpened awl:
Shape of an unsharpened awl with two spines:
Shape of a chisel with two ends from which the top is separated:
Shape of two wide chisels:
All these instruments are used, and when the medicine is less or more of those, depending on the patient's condition, it is necessary that the doctor prepare it well, and when it is given to the sick person, it should be in a good way, and the men who give it must be qualified.
And do not open these instruments again once they are prepared, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
Of extraction of the second one.
When the second one is held back, it should be commanded to the mother that she retain her child in her lap, and if it sneezes, it is good.
And if not, then take a drop and pierce the cover with it, and place it in the mother's mouth, pressing and rubbing and anointing with chamomile and sage, and adding Arabic and cassia and holy wood. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the drop, and place it over the fire.
Then return a cannula of chamomile to the mother' mouth, and hold it so that the vapor comes out into the cavity of the mother.
Then return to make her sneeze, and the second one is also forgotten with speed.
If it remains, then return this purification to the mother's mouth with water or salt water, and if she does not sneeze again, then place her other hand over the one that has been used, and when the second sneezes, then remove this hand. If it is difficult, then return to make her sneeze, and if it is not possible, then return to the mother's purification with oil or salt water, and if she does not sneeze again, then return to the second one. Then leave that it is turned around right and left easily.
And if the mother' mouth is closed, we have already described the purification with sneezing and the medicine of the drop with herbs.
If not forgotten with all the causes that we have described, then you should remember to do this again in the abstraction of the mother' mouth, but if it is not possible, and if it sneezes, you can prepare it by adding a little vinegar and salt, because this will cause her to sneeze.
But if it is prepared, it has a bad smell to the head and the stomach, and then return to the mother' mouth; and if not possible, return to administer it with smoke and appropriately to water.
Some of the Ancients have already prepared this purification by smoking with tobacco and dried fig trees.
Shape of an instrument that is used to smoke the mother according to the retention of blood and the second one:
Be made of vinegar or of oil.
Then return the small end to the cavity and the wide one over the fire, and make the smoking over the fire' braids.
And hold it so that it is consumed by this smoking, and repeat.
Of purification of the bottom of the non-pierced child.
Make an incision at the bottom of the child' behind, which is not pierced, and then prepare with subtlety and precision. Then return to the mother that she pierce her child with this, and if not, then pierce it with an awl, and check so as not to touch the blood.
Then return to that it is covered with smoke of wine and oil; and prepare this one with vinegar within which it is relaxed.
If you fear that it will be burned, then return to pierce with a small knife, and if it is not possible, prepare it in the smoke of wine as described above. If the child wants to urinate, cover it with a towel.
And the burning of the bottom is due to the consolidation of plague or pustule; if this consolidation is carved out, then return to wash with water that we have described in purification and bloodletting.
Of purification of the fistulas that we leave.
The fistula that we leave in the separation of parts is covered with a knot and its roughness according to the distance from the bottom or in the space between the two parts.
And it is a fistula or a wound.
With this knot, the wetness that comes out is white or mild, and some of these fistulas are piercing.
And these piercing ones are known by the exit of water and by wind; and some have used the exit of wine, and it is difficult to get out of those that come out quickly.
And some of these fistulas are located in the space that enters the bladder, and inside the neck of the urethra; and some enter the space between the hips and the pubic bone.
And with water in which the piercing fistula enters the bottom and not, it is because you put the child' mouth into the bottom, and return to try a little oil or iron into the fistula when it is not painful.
If this is painful, then return to try a little iron or hair of a horse into the fistula when you feel the pain or the hair on the child' mouth.
And if you do not feel this or the hair in the mouth, and if it does not come out with the hook, then you will know that it is not piercing; then return to purification.
And when the fistula enters the bladder or the neck of the urethra, the meaning is clear that it is urine; and the prohibition is that the location be treated with medicine to consolidate.
If it is piercing into the space between the hips or the bone and causing pain in the loop of the hip, then the meaning is clear that it hurts here if it enters the bone, and hurting the loop; and that it is burnt there from time to time; and that this purification does not work with oil and does not consolidate.
And in all those tubes penetrating into it there is no cure of any kind, and the cure of them is labour and futility of the medical practitioners who deal with them, over which they are shut up.
But in that which does not penetrate and does not old there is expected the cure according to what you have told me, and what I have already heard and tried.
And it is that the patient lies between your two legs and raises his legs inside them, the cushions are inclined towards his belly, and then introduce the probe into the fistula, or iron if it is in the small of the back, into the spot where you feel pain, so that you know where the probe enters.
And if he feels pain in his lower back when the patient lies down, then cover yourself so that you do not get hurt when the probe enters the anus.
And if you feel the probe enter the anus when it is already inside you, or feel pain between your legs and that part of the body, then certainly it enters; so do not try to treat that one, for there is no cure for it, as we have said.
But they say that it cures in some men.
And of the cure by which health is expected in him, that you use subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, thus: before doing it, introduce that same cauterization into the fistula until it enters through his anus; and then repeat it two or three times, until you know that all those adjusted fistula tissues, which are like feathers of an ash tree, have been burned.
And that one is cured with bandages wrapped around it, until all those tissues which are joined together are burned; and if it is healed with medicines that give birth to and strengthen flesh, then it is well; and if not, then it is not cured by any other cure.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate into the anus, between which and the probe there is a small piece of flesh or a fistula, and sometimes the fistula extends to where the skin is cut; then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see if the skin dries up completely with the probe; and if the fistula has been cut all the way through, then the probe is freed and passed; but if it has not been cut all the way through, then the probe goes no further.
Then wash those fistula tissues which are joined together like a tube of ash, and do not let them be ripped by any other cause.
But if blood comes out repeatedly between you and your work when you open those tissues, then the instrument which is used to stop it, whether it be with fire or with acute medicine, for fire cauterization does well in two things: it joins together those flesh tissues very well; and it stops any flow of blood from them by drying them up completely.
And that one is cured with bandages wrapped around it or with a three-pronged instrument, until the spot gets better; and then cure the gout with hot medicine that gives birth to and strengthens flesh,
and then treat it with medicines that make it tighten and stop bleeding; and when this has been done, then she is well and there is no fear of recurrence.
But if the fistula has already entered through his anus and is long in length from its surface, then introduce the probe into his anus and feel it.
And if the probe goes in and is only skin or flesh between you and it, then it is near penetration; and there is no operation for him except by a trusted and hopeful method.
The cause is to administer it in him one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it out completely within its cavity so that you can easily enter the probe into it and then cure it; or to lengthen it slightly with a sharp instrument, and then cure it; but do not cut it open because it will not heal; and if it leaks pus, then open the fistula at the opening of his anus, and clean out those foul-smelling secretions through his buttocks; and if the orifice does not get better and remains open, then open the fistula in the part of his anus from which he passes stool; but use cauterization to stop any bleeding. And sometimes the fistula ends in this way: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and it is in the part of his anus close to its surface and on the edge of his buttocks, then take care not to pierce it with a sharp instrument, for this is how you prepare the skin before piercing it;
and then put a thin bandage around it, or wrap it in it; and then introduce the probe into that same bandage, wrapped tightly around it, and then cure it; and if you cannot reach the inner cavity of his anus with the probe, then use a sharp instrument to open it.
But if it penetrates into his anus towards the back, then you pull out that same bandage from there and then introduce the probe into his anus; and when you pull out one end of the bandage, then make sure to wrap both ends tightly around its other end so that they do not slip; and when you pull it out, let it rest for a day or two, and then if you put it on the flesh, it will stick to where those tissues are joined together, which are between the two ends of the bandage.
And that is how the disease is cured when it is healed and well.
But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it do so in some way, whether by cauterization or by piercing it, for you must pierce it so that you do not hurt yourself; and then cure it.
The shape of the probe that is curved: its curve is sharp and the other end is not, so that you do not hurt yourself; and this is how it is done when it needs to be done.
Of stitches for hemorrhoids where blood flows in the opening of those.
Hemorrhoids are like two things: either they are between the buttocks and look like charcoal, or those are with grass-like hair. And those are small and large, and the blood from them flows together; and it is only in one place, and on its edges.
But those that are in the part of the buttocks are according to two things: either there is little moisture in them, from which blood flows as yellow water or a little blood in one place; and according to the colour of the skin.
And the cure for those inside his anus is that you order him to lie down, and to squeeze himself so that the hemorrhoids appear. Then you cut off and hang them by nails or what you have; and then you pierdes those with your fingernails.
But if those claws are not on them because of their moisture and softener; then take them by the sharp points, and remove those with a sharp object or a knife, and feel them where they join; and then cut off those with your nails, and then dry them up completely. And that one is cured with the other cure, so that they are well.
And if the buttocks do not obey in leaving: then order the patient to lie down on his back, and to wash himself with that water which is in the anus, and that water will help him to leave easily; and then use a sharp instrument to cut through those.
If the hemorrhoids are pushing out from behind, then the cause is itching, and it is because you are rubbing them with your fingernail, or with an uncut nail, and scratching them, and then treating them with water that has already been used to clean something dirty so that they are cured.
And whoever wants to do the incision, follow this method: take a thread and wind it around two needles, and insert those into the hole, and remove the hemorrhoids from above, and make the other end of the thread come out over the hole, and horizontally; then tighten the hemorrhoid by stretching firmly, and then remove the thread and needle.
Do this to everyone, and leave one of them uncut, so that the excess blood from the body runs out from there.
Then place a cloth over the buttocks soaked in rose water or wax; and place that on the patient's buttocks, and order the servant to pause. Then let that person sit in a box; and when it is wet, treat those with oil or another treatment until they are healed.
And since those old medicines are not effective for them, if you scratch them with a spithook or your fingernail so that they become wet and are drenched in the fluid above them, which prevents their consolidation, then treat those that have consolidated.
Then you should cut them off with a sharp tool so that the first hole, due to itching, becomes an ulcer, and treat those that have already healed.
Know that alamismire is finished, and it is only if the skin takes on a color resembling a clove's head, and it affects the whole body, especially the feet and the toes, and because of them the pain should be directed upward.
And then you should know that it is cut where it is in the path of the claw, and if it is cut with scissors or an uncut nail, and then remove it from its root; and treat that one.
And if you want, cauterize the second one that precedes in the line of the claw's head.
The common warts is a small, sharp, ulcerated, round spot on the surface of the body, and vapor-like marks appear in most children.
The treatment for them is to spread it and scratch it, or to stretch it with a thread inside where the box is. And if you want, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
The common warts is a small, thick, ulcerated, round spot on the surface of the body that sometimes itches, and when the warts touch each other, they cause a pain resembling a bee sting.
The treatment for them is to take a pen-like tube, and make it strong, and place that over the warts where it holds them in the circle of the pen's tip, and then turn your hand around the tube, so that you remove the warts from their root.
And if you want, do this using an iron or lead tube according to this shape:
It is important that the tip of the tube is sharp and silent (if not piercing), wrapped so that the liquid inside it does not come out, and then turn it.
And if you want, cauterize the warts according to what we have said before in the cauterization of athyr in the line of cauterization.
Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give medicine.
Some marks are made of silver or lead or melted wax, and some marks are made of small instruments, because the instrument used for treating small children should be small; and that of the instrument used for treating adults is large, and those marks are small.
The shape of the treatment mark is large and small:
The end of the tube above where the bag is attached should be wide according to this method; and it should be distinct from that place where the bag is attached, because sometimes it is wide and sometimes not.
And the far end of the tube, which goes into the buttocks, should be silent  (if not piercing), turning from the side, and having two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should vary according to the thickness of the rays and be wider on the small.
And the bag in which the medicines are held should be of a bladder or sheep's wool, and its stem should be a palm.
And it should be pierced by two cuts like this when it is turned over, and if the space between the cuts is large, then the tip is wide.
And then you should insert it into the cuts of a strong thread, which should be made of fine cotton, and adjust the bag to it; and when it is placed on the patient' head, let it be tight in the cap of the mark between two strong constrictions, and then mark each cut: The quality of marking them is that you fill the bag with medicine, which has been heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to make it too long or too short.
And then the patient should be laid on his back, and his legs lifted up so that they are under two pillows or a mattress; and apply the tip of the cauterizer to oil or white of egg or mucilage of fenugrec or something similar; and insert it into the buttocks with ease, and the minister takes the bag and squeezes it with two hands and expresses it with force so that it flows into the crucible in which the treatment is being made; and then remove the treatment and the patient lifts his legs from the mattress.
And if the medicine forces him to sneeze, hold back as much as you can; and if he sleeps for a whole night, it is better to wait until the next day.
If you treat them with medicines that relieve gas in the stomach and sneeze, then you should repeat the treatment if they still sneeze after using those medicines.
And if in the buttocks there are hemorrhoids or painful swelling, then it is the treatment mark being small and silent, according to those marks with which children are treated.
Of treatment for plagues.
I have already said and explained in the division of the treatment for plague which medicine is suitable, and I will explain that again as follows:
Thus, the plague differs according to where it is caused and according to the place where the infection takes place.
The causes of the plague are different according to whether it is caused by a person's behavior (such as drinking or eating contaminated food), cutting with a knife, hitting with a lance, a spear, or similar to those who cause wounds.
And the plagues that are in a person' body are different according to whether it is caused by a plague on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the arms, and similar to those who affect members.
And I recommend the treatment of some diseases so that this reasoning stops and takes place on other diseases.
And I will begin with simple headaches, because the memory of the composition will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Then say that when it happens in the head simple headache and is not fracture, consider: if it is by thinking of water or of appearance, and has already trinquada the nose so only and is a great pain and you are afraid about this patient will have an apostema cauterization, then you get up and do cauterize the head with wine so much, and do not delay there; and extract it to that person according to the quantity of its virtue if no more cause prohibits cauterization, mostly if the headache is caused by a headache from little.
And it is cauterization of the opposite of the diseased part; and protect that patient from repletive things, from food and from thick foods.
But if by the minimization there is some prohibition, then it is lessened by food and do not bring it close to meat or drink.
And pause on the disease, if to him happens apostema cauterization, then pour pure oil or wine in which is styptic.
But if it is safe from cauterization, then pause on the disease, if it is recent am its third day and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to put there small.
And if the air has already changed that powder, then pause on a wound with wine until it is healed.
But if the disease is big or it is by cutting of space and of appearance, and their lips are not closed with sutures, then adjust those according to what I recommend for the suturing of them.
But if the disease has already been discovered from the bone and it is not repressed but only a small suspension, then cut off that one and cure the disease with medicines and restore the flesh to its place instead of the nose, and order for this patient that he eat food in which there are gross things: cheese and bread and butter, or whatever is available.
And if there is putrefaction in the nose and it does not stick to the bone, then you cut off all of it and pour it out, and then cure it.
But if in these diseases there is an artery or a vein from which blood can flow from the disease and it is not cut off by medicines, then you inquire about that artery, and if it has been cut off, then cut it off with a blade, or stick it; and if necessity forces you so that what we have said does not suit you, then cauterize it so that the disease be cut off.
And if these diseases are simple and small, the cause of them is dry; so that you sprinkle on those powder, because when consolidated that one before the air has changed it.
And the way of that powder is this: take a part of oil from a tree, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts for an unknown cause; all mixed together and well shaken, and if there is disease filled with blood, and it is confined by good constriction until it sticks to it, then it is coagulated with the blood.
And then put that powder on it and leave it alone, and do not take it off until it is healed, because it will not become apostemic, since it has not been treated with medicine.
But once in a while, water only, when it is not at your side in the presence of oil and dragon' s blood.
And this operation is done in the big diseases when it is convenient that they be paused on those and well-closed, and only recent diseases whose air has not changed them.
And if the air has changed them, especially in summer, then it is not convenient to put this powder on them, but rather cure them with water that we have said, or rather pause on them with wet garlic juice or with flour of wheat mixed with water and honey until they are healed; and then cure them with other treatment until they are healed.
But if it happens in the fracture of a bone, and it is small, then you extract water with gestures.
And I direct the treatment for fractures of the head with poison.
Of the diseases of the neck.
But if the disease happens in the neck, then it is not difficult to distinguish from the treatment of a simple headache.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in its place but is avoided treatment with water that causes severe constriction, so as to avoid injury and pain because it affects the nerves and hurts them. And you do not pause on the disease for any reason, because the substance of nerves is red and the continuation of them is to the skull, which is the pus of all the members.
But if water is used for treatment with herbal medicines, so that it is washed in double water, a drop of red oil or not red, and a drop of minora when it is washed with double water and the other remedies are minora according to this way, and dip it in water.
But if the disease is big, then administer sutures or clamp the lips together, and then cure it with powder until it is healed.
But if the disease has depth or happens in the lowest part of the pus, then pierce that one in the place most affected.
But if the disease has already been cut off and there is a flow of blood from it, then separate or dry that one, or stick it together, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to water.
But if the vertebrae of the neck have been cut off completely and only the veins of the neck are left, then you adjust the lips of the nose with sutures on the top of the jawbone and do not touch that one; then reduce that one to its natural figure, and tighten it with a good constriction, and leave it alone; and then cure it with wet garlic juice in which there is stinging and excitement until it is healed.
But if the disease has been done in the bone with injury, then strike that one, and if there are fragments of bones, extract them all; and if it is not covered by a covering, leave it alone until the disease is healed, and separate and clean its edges so that they do not hurt each other.
And if the disease is recent, then sprinkle on it the powder which I have recommended for you. But if the disease has been done with a fistula, then cure it with water from which the memory of composition will come in the third chapter.
If it is a cut of a knife or a lance, and it has depth, then consider whether the patient is gasping or not; you should know that the disease is dangerous.
But if it does not have depth and the disease is recent from its third day, then you pause in it on the first hour with powder, and do not tighten it so that the disease is not held in its depth, and return to the patient, and release that one two times a day; and if the disease is in the eye, then pause there also with an attractive oil.
And if the wound is not present, then place it in the orifice of the plunger so that the water comes out and runs through its opening; and let the patient sleep on top of the plunger so that the water runs through his body.
But if after three days or more the spasms and tremors in the patient's body do not disappear, nor does his bowels move properly or his other bodily functions, then know that the plague is cured; then treat him with calamine and the other treatment until he is healed.
But if the patient's healing has been delayed and the wound is still open, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it with vinegar.
And if the plague is from a cut or knife wound, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat it with water that has been preceded by suturing, if it is large, or powder, if it is small.
But if it has already formed a pus inside the bone, and it is already separating from it, then place the wound on the plunger and squeeze out those separated parts, if they are separate. But if they are not separated, then let it rest until the plague is expelled, which is accomplished easily.
And of the other accidents of plague in the other members, the cure is the same as that which we have said.
Of the plagues in the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be great, small, or moderate.
A small disruption is difficult to treat in any other way, and if you do not prevent its intrusion into its place quickly, it will become very difficult, for it widens and thickens due to the intrusiveness of its contents.
And therefore the mildest disruption is better, because in this one it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, but it is difficult in the two mentioned above.
And know that abdominal surgery is done in four ways; but twice as many surgeries are common to all the other plagues of the body.
And two others are proper to the other plagues, but only one is proper to abdominal surgery.
And I recommend to you each explanation and description.
So I say that when the plague is small and there is no cause of the hernia for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in two ways: either because of the mildness of the disruption as we have said, or when the hernia bulge becomes thicker due to the cold air.
And therefore, when it is like this, I recommend that you cut off the hernia in such a way that you dip a sponge or cloth in tepid water alone, or that you take it into tepid water, and caraway, and aniseed, and spice, and rub on the hernia until the swelling is resolved.
Some veal are made with a stimulant that increases their temperature, and it is better than tepid water in resolving swelling.
And if you see that the swelling has been resolved, then moisten the hernia with water in which it was placed high and cold, for by water it is eased due to a few causes.
But if the hernia does not respond to this treatment, then cut off a small piece of the hernia with a sharp instrument, as it is inserted there to treat hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is proper that it should not be cut off, and that it should not be occupied with drying out unnecessarily and starving itself.
As for the instrument, consider its shape:
The one has a sharp, the other has an obtuse, and the tip is slightly blunt, not very acute.
And therefore, when the hernia has grown larger and is protruding from its place, then know that the reduction of it should be according to its natural shape, in its own place, if possible above water, because it is better.
But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient on their back, and pause their buttocks higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head higher than the buttocks.
And apparently if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your attention and consideration momentarily in order that the part where the plague is may be higher than the other.
And thus you will administer water in the great plagues and in the moderate plagues.
And in the small plagues, prepare the water that we have said, and let the minister be between your two hands, which has the entire disruption under it and adjusts the lips of it, and let it discover the cause of the surgery from another part.
This is the common way of suturing: one that takes the needle, or counts the needle according to the amount of the width of the plague; and let go of the end of the disruption of the little finger, and tighten the needle, or another that you do not insert into the two ends of the knot, both ends of the string that is left inside the incisions, until it enters through that incision; and you have added the two ends of the knot and made four orders.
And let it tighten with two double threads in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes add the two ends together, and let go of the width of the finger, and let it tighten one end of it, and let that end be tied with a knot, and let it be added to the other end; and let go of the thickness of the little finger, and let another needle enter into it, and let it pass through that one, and let that one be tied with a knot, and let it be added to the other end; and do not cease to make water if need be, adding the needles until you have completed the whole tension of the plague.
And let the small needles be between fineness and subtlety, because the fine needles pierce the flesh easily; and the thick ones are a difficult instrument in the knot, and therefore by water let them be both fine and subtle and coarse.
And I do not know that the needle is fixed in both ends of the knot nearest to it because the flesh should not be easily pierced and the plague should not become established before its consolidation.
And do not prolong the surgery so that the plague is not prevented from being consolidated.
And let the ends of the needles poke into the patient so that they do not rest on their back and sleep; and pause over the sutures of all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and let them be inside until you know that the plague has been consolidated.
And these special sutures with needles are more convenient in small plagues because they only need a single needle or two or three to hold them together.
But the second is like this: and it is that you administer to the four ends, of the knot and two extremities of the string, in one incision, with a needle that you have tied; and let it be wrapped up in fineness and subtlety.
And when the needle will have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that meteyssa part where you began to use it, so that the thread retreats from the sub-upper part of the incision into the plague, so that the suturing is according to a stitch with thread on the cloth that has been tightened.
And place between each stitch the thickness of this small thread.
And this stitch knows the men.
And I sewed up the wound that had been made in a man's abdomen by a knife, which had caused the eruption of a larger plague of a palm, and was an outlet for the bug of two palms from his navel and was a rupture in the middle of the member; and then I reduced what was broken so that the bug did not come out.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and I healed him and his wound was cured; and then I applied honey to it to promote healing, and he recovered his health.
And the other wounds had not healed; but by a miracle they healed, because I did not heal him with oil, for it was in a place where oil does not help or benefit from any medicine, but I applied a patch of wool over the wound twice a day and washed it thoroughly with honey every day until he was healed.
Then I made two kinds of stitches according to the narrative of Paracheus.
And you began to sew with the knot, and you put the needle in from the outside into the inside.
And so with the needle penetrating into the knot and into that meat, according to the prescription and length of all the body, and leaving the end of the thread in which you have put the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the outside into the inside in the middle of the body, and leave the other end of the thread at a distance from the part where you have made the first stitch.
And when you have made that penetration, then you make another stitch in the same place from the outside into the inside; and leave the end of the thread at a distance from the part where you have made the first stitch. And so you continue making stitches one after another until you have gone all around the body.
And make that penetration with your needle in the thread which you have made to pass from one side of the body to the other.
Then begin to work from that side of the body and continue your needle's work at the end which is in the middle; and bring out the thread from the other side where you have made a stitch, and tie it off there.
And make another stitch, and another, and so on until you have finished sewing everything up according to that example.
And the whole method of sewing is that you sew with stitches so small that they cannot be seen; and that you sew the knot once at one end of the thread, but leave the other end free.
And the second kind of stitch is called Gulia, and it is done by speaking and counting; that is, you sew with one knot at each end of the thread, but you add nothing between them; and you apply one end to another, and the other to the end opposite to it, and so on according to how many times you want to count.
And when you have brought your needle to the end of the body again from where you began, and made the same kind of stitch there; then bring the needle out through one side of the body, and make another stitch on the other side from inside the body; and bring the needle back in again on the first side where you started.
Then return those patches and make another penetration from inside the body to outside in two other places on the opposite side, which are in the middle; and bring out your needle again.
And this method of sewing is better than common sewing, and it is a kind of stitch that I have mentioned before.
This is the speech of Gulia
And it is called a stitch of the belly, which is made with two needles; and you should put your needle in from one side where there is a hole, and begin to make stitches according to the method described above for making stitches on animals' throats.
You should know that when a rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitch is more difficult than for other parts of the belly.
And the judgement of medicine to cure the plague is different from that of other plagues.
And the cause is that when you bring the patient to the saint in advance of the person who has the plague, and reduce the bug and sew it up properly, then apply powdery incandescence.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then apply powdery incandescence to those parts which are in pain and which make a hard sound when touched, and they will be consolidated knot and thread; and then you will heal that person as is done for other plagues, unless it is cured.
But if you do not have medicines, then apply to the wound only, and wash it thoroughly with water every day until it is healed; for you will not need other medicines in this case, since simple plagues are easily cured by applying them to the affected parts, as you have taught yourself.
But if you fear that the common plague will spread to the principal members, then cover those parts with wool dipped in a wet quality of oil, or rose water, and place it between the muscles and leaves them in place.
And if there is pain or decay in the belly, which is caused by bad air, then apply to it a black stinging substance made of vi, and more so if the decay has reached the belly and there are pus-like emissions penetrating into its concave shape.
You should know that the gross belly is of a kind of bad air, and it has healing power for that which is in the thin belies.
And it is difficult to heal because the belly that is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from any plague that enters into it of all things; and this is because there are many veins in it and they are large, and its subtlety and nearness to nature's nerves.
But if the thing that you are treating from the plague is cloth, and you bring it from a distant place, then reduce it according to your method of reducing thin bellies.
But if it has passed into the space and has become wet or dark, then bind that place with thread tightly where it is injured, to prevent blood from flowing; for in cloth there are veins and arteries.
Then cut off that piece, and bind two ends of the thread to the edge of the wound on both sides from where the plague has entered; so that your hand will be relieved from that attraction which it has from the cloth and emission of the plague's bad air.
Rememberance of the plagues when they occur in the belly.
When a rupture occurs in the belly and is small, then it may be possible to heal some people, but that is because I have seen such a thing; for there was a man who had been struck by a lance in his stomach on the right side, and that man's plague was old and had become a fistula, and he had an abscess and putridity.
Then I saw the cure for him had not yet been found in order to heal him; but I removed the abscess from within until it healed and the place was consolidated.
And I had placed a covering over the patient's abdomen, holding it down on the bed where she had been struck by misfortune; and I did not allow any misfortune or illness to strike her or her body in its natural order of things, eating and drinking, and I kept them both between baths and exercise.
And I have heard that when the bowel becomes blocked, and is small, then cover it according to this method: for you take a piece of string from a large container; and then join the two sides of the blockage together, and place one of those pieces over the two sides of the blockage; so, when he takes hold of those and tightens his hand, cut off the end of the string, because it will stick to the two sides and will not dissolve.
Then place another piece next to the first one, and do not stop making pieces as you go along all the way through the blockage.
And then cut off that piece, and continue doing so until the blockage is gone; and no harm will come to the patient.
And it is possible that the bowel will be tied together by a thin thread which comes from the bowels of animals because it is made of the same material as needles; and you take the end of those threads, and it is dry, and then join the end of it to a thread from another bowel, wrapped up, and then insert that thread into needles and tie it to that thread, and reduce it in length.
This method of stitching together using threads is just another way, a backup plan, to trust and hope for the best.
Perhaps if the blockage is large and wide, mostly because then there will be no other option but to cut it out, and it will not heal completely.
Of surgery on the gut and the fistula.
Did you know that all blockages and abscesses, when they become infected and old, turn into ulcers, and are not consolidated and get better on their own over time; and then, in any part of the body, it is called a fistula, and we call those old infections 'zuchem'.
And a fistula, in truth, is a hollow and deep wound, white where it is, and painful when touched; and so it is called 'rizatz', that is, pain.
And it is in men who are wet, and their strength leaves them; and the moisture is absorbed away in a few hours. And sometimes that moisture becomes dust, which is little and thick, and it is fine.
I have shown all of these causes, and those are the reasons why ulcers form, and their treatment with medicines in the division.
And I have told you how to heal the fistula, which is done through surgery.
Did you know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because they can affect veins, arteries, nerves, the colon, or any organ, or one of the joints made up of many bones, and are similar to those of a main member and its neighbors.
And then of those fistulas that are done in this way, the most difficult to heal are those who do not respond to treatment, and they occupy a person's time and ignorance.
And if one of those fistulas is very deep and does not reach those places that are mentioned, and you wait and trust in its healing; then try to cut it or tie it up, and if the fistula follows the course of medicine, and you inquire about it.
Perhaps if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin needle, because lead is lighter and it will follow the curve of the twist.
And if the fistula is causing terrible pain, then you cannot imagine how to treat it.
Then clean the opening with salt, because the moisture that you put on it will run to all openings and leave them alone.
Then inquire carefully, according to which method you can understand if there are any bones or nerves; and it is the depression of the fistula, distant or close, and it has only a few openings, and it is on top of everything, and you recognize your pain, and you compress your hand over the spot, and similar meanings and causes of accidents to the ulcer.
And when you have sorted through all of these causes with certainty, then go to the treatment according to confidence: and it is that you consider if it is a fistula in a close location, or away from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of those places that I have told you about.
Then dry out the fistula according to what has been said before in the description of it, and that water is produced from it, and that it comes from the opening of the flesh, or hair, and similar things; and treat it so that it heals.
Perhaps if the fistula is very deep, and follows the course of medicine, then cut it as much as possible, and thoroughly clean all its corrupted flesh; and then apply sharp medicines, and insert them into the depression of the fistula, which you have understood with precision by using a needle.
Then pour it onto the fistula, within some small vessels that the sharp medicine eats away everything that is rotten in its depression.
And then restore that to its place with a strong hand, so that all corrupted flesh is removed; and it will be healed.
Perhaps if it is not healed by water, then you cauterize it according to what we have said before.
Perhaps if the cause of the fistula is a bone, and it should be certified, then you investigate and dry it out according to what we have said before, unless you find a vein, or a nerve, or one of the main members as we have described.
Perhaps if the bone is discovered and it is in any corruption or darkness, then you cut that part off completely, so that the corruption is entirely removed; and then pour water on it where it needs to be healed.
And if it is not healed and gets worse, knowing that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you will discover on the second try, with great care and precision, the reason for it and clean it thoroughly; and then restore that.
And so if it is healed, then it is good; but if not, you know that the corruption is in the depth of the body, which cannot be reached, and then you go to that part where it cannot be cured.
And if the bone is rotten, small, or your hand can reach it, use small tweezers to extract it.
And if there are any bones left, extract them carefully and not a single one should be left to cause you problems with your strength.
But if there is any discomfort from the moisture, and in their incision there is neither fear nor mistake, then cut those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to heat the bones of your hand, then pause over the water that can cool the wound, and leave that flesh and ligaments in place until the bone is solid, and ensure that the section you have made is secure and not compromised.
Then, if you wish, pause over the triple-strength oil, or the Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, for when these ligaments are washed away, and the bones are separated from each other, and this attraction is eased.
But if it is a large bone like the spine or hip or leg, and that which is corrupted is the surface only, then cut away this blackness and corruption completely, and then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted is a large part of the bone, and corruption has already reached the marrow, then it is necessary to close this and cut it completely within the area where the corruption has entered, and then heal it within that which is solid.
And I recommend to you that an experienced man assist you in this case, so that he can pause and support your operation.
Choose a young man of about thirty years, to whom pain has spread from the hip, and the large mass has moved deep into the body where the substance has spread from the hip, and this is the substance of an abscess, and not caused by an external factor.
And then, when the time was right, approach it with care for the error of the doctors that had occurred before it became severe, and quickly address the matter, and make incisions in its surface, which all gave pain and the moisture of the body.
And then various doctors have treated him for two years, but I was called in.
And I saw the legs of him and the fluid running from those orifices over a large area; and his body was completely limp, and its color was yellow.
And then I inserted my hand into one of those orifices and felt the bone.
Then I looked carefully at all the orifices, and I found that they were due to large fractures of the spine.
Then I lay down and cut open one of the orifices, through which I discovered a fracture of the bone, and extracted what was corrupted, and it was already dry and rotten and disintegrated; and one of the spine fractures had penetrated into the pelvis.
Then I carefully closed what I had discovered and prepared the bone for surgery.
I recognized that it was not a fracture of the bone but the corruption that I had extracted and closed up, and I had already removed it completely.
Then I continued with the restoration of the wound using consolidating medicines for a long time, until it was consolidated.
Then I returned and examined the bone again after the first discovery, and continued to extract the ongoing corruption with the bone.
Then I carefully removed what remained of the corruption, and then I continued with the cure and restoration of him, and it was not restored.
Then I discovered another fracture on the opposite side, and did not cut into the bone little by little, and continued with the cure, and it was not restored until I cut into the bone around a palm of it, and I extracted the marrow, and then I continued with the cure using medicines, and it was consolidated slowly and healed.
There was no need for further surgery or incision in this case due to the patient's frailty and lack of tolerance for pain and risk of death, since these occurred at all hours due to excessive vomiting and fainting.
And so he healed completely, and there is no replacement for hard bone; it returns to its original strength, and his movements are natural and free of pain in all parts of his body.
But if the bone is prominent in place of the body, then cut it according to this method: and that you take a ligament and tighten it at the end of that bone, and command someone to extend that ligament in its length; and pause that ligament of wool made fine; and then bind that over the flesh which is left on the bone, and extend the end of it so that it reaches where you want to cut it, and discover the flesh on that spot which you wish to cut with a knife.
Then set your hand firmly upon the bone, for when you make an incision it is not forbidden to use a knife that does not cut the rotten flesh.
Then cut the incision little by little, since if it is in the concave part of the bone and does not appear on the surface as seen, then force the ligament to tighten on the opposite side.
If the bone is corrupted and prominent, then move it a little continued way towards the other side, and the corruption is in its middle or in one part of it; then discover all the flesh completely, and then set your hand firmly upon it, and tighten it at the end where the corruption is.
And let the incision be made according to the location of the corruption a little way, as we have said.
But if the corruption is in the joint, cut that joint which is corrupted, and tighten the bone at the end where it continues towards the other side.
But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not a reason for cutting but a reason to be left alone.
If the corruption is in the chest or neck, it is difficult; however, if you inquire about how the corruption appears to you, and cut it according to its appearance, and make a decision according to each case which is possible for you, and correct it as needed, then do not cut any veins or nerves.
And know what instruments are suitable for this operation, and prepare them carefully, considering the situation of the bones, their size, subtlety, greatness, or smallness, and their hardness or rarity; so that you prepare everything necessary for a special operation with appropriate tools.
And know that this operation requires a special tool which you must carefully study and understand the techniques of this art, and witness the consequences of mistakes, for since you have already made them with your own hands in the past, you know what is required of these instruments for any operation.
I will leave you with the number of instruments that I have described up to this point, and you can refer to them as needed when performing operations based on your restrictions which you will experience in the future. A serra se l'utiliza per les partz del cors que no corren per la carne o per les articulaciones.
Form of another sere:
Form of a great sere again:
Form of a ray: So the head of this ray according to the form of the star's claw, and the points of it are according to the form of the points alstefegi.
And there is not any that can be used except that you make the heads of the joints rot when they are rotten, or the great mouth is wide open.
Form of a small razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another sere properly done: Be it done by an arc of it and the sharpness of it with a knife-like edge, and the member of it with a dagger-like edge properly done. Form of it:
Form of a razor having a concave form:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another curved-edged razor:
Form of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Form of another minor incisor:
Form of another incisor resembling a ray, and the end of it is like a sere, and it is displayed in motz locs in the edge of the bones:
Form of a ray that conveys to the perforation of those bones:
And its end is triangular and has an acute point.
It is made of Indian steel, and the shape resembles that of a ray, and all the causes that we have spoken of razors and incisers and serrations are true.
Of the incision's extremes and the locking of the bones.
The extremes may be curable either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, and because you treat that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption arises from within that member so that it comes to pass that the member itself is destroyed by water of death or of malice which is a greater destruction of the member.
And the sign of that to which it happens, is that the member is made black within so that it may be seen that fire has burned it, or it may be made black properly within so that the corruption that happened there enters into that member and touches all the body; and therefore cut you out that incision of it.
And apparently if the cause of corruption is from some poisonous causes thus from a scorpion of the sea or a weasel or a rat and in similitude.
And if the corruption or the incision is at the end of that, then you incise it and do not give space for the corruption to pass so that it does not enter into the hand.
And apparently if you approach that member, then you incise it from the edge of the fire, and do not give space for the corruption to pass so that it does not enter into the hand of fire of the arm.
And if instead you cut that member, then you incise the arm within the joint.
And if the corruption passes around that joint, then in that member is the death of the patient; and another cause is added to it in quantity of virtue.
And apparently if corruption comes from that foot where it is corrupted from the other foot, then you incise it within one of your toes.
And if it takes hold of a toe of the foot, then you incise all of the foot. Maybe if it can be made to enter into the nape, then you incise the back within the junction of the nape.
And if corruption has already come about on the nape, then there is nothing left but destruction, and let the patient die.
And the way to incise that member or to cut it is so that you stretch the ligament at the end you want to incise, and stretch another ligament over that place; and extend the minister a ligament to the ends of them, and extend the other minister a ligament over them; and you separate the flesh which is between those two ligaments as far apart as you can, and that incised or cut.
It is so that it does not touch the place in any way so that it does not cause injury, and that it comes to the patient's wound with an appropriate cautery and poultice.
Maybe if you happen to be in flux of blood when you work, then you cauterize the place properly, or put some powder on it that tightens the blood; and then return to your medicine properly.
Then you cut off the infected member with a ligament properly, and cure it within so that it is healed.
And I recommend to you that you go to a man in his own foot, this is the accident which happened to him in his own foot by being burned so that it was gathered together by fire's combustion.
And that corruption first came about in his own foot within so that it tended all of the foot.
And then that man prepared himself for that purpose properly so that he came to the member with the velocity of his foot which is suffering from pain and from the burning of his foot, and incised that foot within the junction, and fire healed it.
A long time came to him that corruption in the member of the hand by accident.
And then he came to me, and so I pierced it properly by putting on the body of medicines, according to the changing of his body; and there was not a response from that superfluitat, and it began to go to the other foot within so that it began in the hand.
And then he asked me to incise his hand, and I did not want to do so with the expectation of a response from that superfluitat, and more than that I had to cut off his hand properly because the virtue of that patient was over death.
And then he left me, and returned to his own country and came to me that man who prepared himself; and incised his whole hand, and it was healed.
And I have not added to this narrative but that it may be an assistant upon him who is suffering from this malady, and that it may be a sign by which it may be recognized and according to which it may be turned.
Of curative medicines and their quality with drugs.
When the pus appears on some fleshly parts of the body and the space of the pus is prolonged within so that it forms a collection of pus, then cut it properly and pierce it, and let the blood come out of it, and clean up that place by taking off a thin skin, and do not cause injury to any bone or ligament or joint; it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Maybe if the space is prolonged within so that corruption comes up next to some member, then it is called a fistula and not named.
And the cure of it is that you incise all of that sinus properly, and more so when it is made thin and is done with a cloth, and confirm that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
Maybe if you hope that the sinus will adhere and that that corruption has not come about by a previous corruption, and in the sinus there is pus on the surface, then you treat it with a poultice.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm which has the odor is of fetid smell, then clisterize it properly with an Egyptian medicine consisting of oil and honey and rose water, and let them be mixed in a vessel, and let them be put on fire so that the medicine boils and comes to the top of the water.
And then you take from him the water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey, and clisteryze the person's belly, and tighten his orifices, and leave the medicine in him for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that with a strainer; and make water for so many days until the person' belly is cleansed and their shame is relieved.
And some people are clisteryzed with ash water, when this medicine is not effective at present; and that you take the ash from the vine, and put it on the water; and then strain it and clisteryze it inside them so that you swear that the belly will remain closed.
And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then clisteryze it with honey and mix zink three times, and clisteryze it with wine and honey mixed, for honey has a property of cleansing and washing, and wine binds the belly, and most importantly when there is excess stiffness and dryness in it.
And when you make water a few times and are confident that the belly is relieved, then clisteryze it with water that softens the flesh in it.
And that you take a syrup of daphnicum and dissolve it with rosin oil and wine, or that you clisteryze it with some medicines and ointments that I have already described in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the belly are tight in which the canal of the clistery is not received, then you widen it little by little, and pause in it a few folded envelops of Egyptian ointment or basil ointment so that it is widened.
And apparently if the orifices are wide, then you add sutures to their lips and leave the quantity in which there is added the clistery.
And if the orifice from which blood runs is raised above the area of the navel, then dry that place in a pus base where it is so that the blood does not run into it, for when the arm is constricted in the belly's depth, the flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the belly within the limits of the base pus according to what you want, then you pierce that member with the preparation with which the arm runs smoothly according to what you have on your body and is not kept by any cause of the blood.
May that which is over the belly' orifice, which remains closed all the time so that blood does not run into it and affects the arm. And so you will know if the blood that runs from the arm is little or much, or is non-digested or digested.
And when you consider the location of that belly, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in a pus.
And when your medicine is prolonged in this way and you see the matter that is stuck to the belly' orifice has adhered or owned it, then you wash it off or change the drape after three days, and when you wash it off, then change the ointment.
May that if the belly has adhered to it a subtle virus, then you do not despair of the possession of it, for healing belongs to it, for some men in whom the generation of flesh in the plagues takes place, and in those in whom it does not take place.
And if the belly has adhered after three days and is the cause of prolonged possession, then you adjust to drying out medicines, and if those medicines are wet in their substance and power, then dry them with a syrup of daphnicum, when there is an excess of addition of salt.
And the latter to be cleaned is that you take a syrup of daphnicum and dissolve it in rosin oil, and has it in its substance, and then applies it to it, and uses it.
And that is sufficient in this action when there is no arm, a syrup of daphnicum, honey when it is dried up inside that it is thickened, and use it; or that you take myrrh and aloes and mix them, and trisse all of them and powder them on the honey when it is cooked, and then apply it to the drape and tighten that one over the belly; and apply that honey which has dried up inside, and powder it over the drape and tighten that.
And some people give long-lasting aristology and cut of celestial lily (and it is lily of the sky) and flour of erys and centaurea, and use those simple or prepare them, mix them and strain them and powder them on the honey that has been mentioned; and use it.
And if the belly is prolonged and has not been cured with this treatment, then you know that corruption is in its beginning, and has already occurred in bones or in other hard members or to the joints; then you treat it with a fistic cure, yes when there is swelling.
Of treatment of a paronychia and applied ointment and cutting and trimming of the nail and section.
Paronychia is a pustule that does not let go of the nail of the hand or foot, and it becomes hard on the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its treatment is expensive, or it is a bad pustule, or it is corrupted, and the flesh rots, and the nail is corroded, and the nail's color changes to black.
And so when you have that water which I have mentioned in the division and do not rely on your treatment, then cover up all of the excess that is rotten from the nail, and then cauterize the wound with fire, for cauterizing the wound is beneficial in it.
May that if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and those additions to the nail have already compromised the flesh at the base, and it begins to rot and corrode, and cover up that angle of the nail that you hit the flesh, and push that flesh up, and then pause over it that is left of the flesh with burning medicines that are corrosive so that it is completely closed; and then treat it with ointment.
May that if corruption has already set in the bone, then you cut out that bone and extract it, for there is no cure but to let the bone rot.
And if corruption and decay have set in the finger, then you cut it off in one of the fingers according to what is appropriate for that member, and then treat it with ointment.
May that if the nail has percussion or injury, and if it has severe pain, then you begin to give the patient bloodletting, and then dry the nail with a transverse cut above it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for you will provoke severe pain in the patient, and cause birth of excess blood in that place; and then treat that place with water.
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or in the origin of certain nuts. But that which is born in certain nuts of the above-mentioned plant does not harm anyone; but that which is born in the joints is very harmful.
And as for those that are born with a tender flesh, the section is less painful; and it is because you cut them with a sharp blade from their root.
But as for that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and so you should guard against its separation.
But as for that which is born in certain nuts, you should cut off its meat at the beginning with a round blade into the bone, and then you should hold it tightly between those blades, convenient to water, and then heal it within.
But the solidification which takes place between certain parts of the body, whether by nature or by solidification from plague or from fire, or by similitude, so that it dries up; and then it is necessary to restore those parts to their natural shape.
And place between them a thin layer of lead in order that it may not be solidified too much; and separate them or place a small blade between them so that it may be solidified according to how you wish.
And if by similitude solidification takes place in certain nuts on the palm, then dry it up according to how it is prepared, and shape it according to the member's form.
Of the separate parts, such as the fingers, there are four veins.
And these same veins, wrapped around with thick fluids full of melancholy humors which come from the parts of the body, especially from the legs; and most of all in the legs of those who travel or work or carry burdens.
Then give to the patient a strong purge of black bile from time to time with a strong drink; and then let blood from the basilar vein.
But the cure of them is according to two methods: the one is that they should be cut and then be drawn out the black humor; and the other method is that the vein should be lifted up and all should be extracted.
But the cutting of them is according to this method: put the leg at first into water tail-up so that the gross humor may be resolved, which comes from the leg, and then tighten the bandage tightly on the part under a raised cushion within; and then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three by a wide incision, and then raise the black humor to the height of the leg's weight above the bandage; and then lower it again into the water, so that the quantity may be exhausted which you wish, and which is often enough, and whose power persists in the patient.
Then take away that, and command him to abstain from black bile-generating foods.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and the patient feels ill.
But the raising of them is according to this method: if you cut the leg of the patient and dip it into water so that it swells up and the veins are inflated; or if you exercise it strongly by means of an exercise, since a bath is not at hand, within that member may be scarred.
And then cut the leg at one end of the vein by incision in the long or in the back; or at the lower end of the leg by cutting it off.
And then cut the leg with a knife and squeeze the vein out completely so that its appearance may be seen; and it is necessary to see that it turns black.
And so, if you extract it and then cut off the leg, you will have that white humor which is called cord.
And then put that at a distance from it so that it may be raised and may be taken away; and suspend it by an ounce of gold.
And then cut another section close to that one by three cuts; and then squeeze the leg from the top of the vein so that it appears.
And then raise that one and cut it from the back by a section near its end; and then extract it and raise it up so that it is extracted by the second section; and then extract it from the section which is above that.
And then place it so that you extract that one from the highest or lowest section of all the sections; and then cut it.
And if you do not obey me in order to extract it and raise it up, then insert a double-edged needle into it tightly and pull it out; or take it away by the end of the leg with a bandage tightly around it; and turn your hand completely so that it may be extracted. And keep in mind that if it is broken, then it will be difficult for you to raise that one; and it may come back to the patient through that wound.
And when that one is completely taken away, then place it on the spot of the plague which is submerged in water and oil which is yellow and not yellow; and heal it within so that it may be healed.
And if the wine has contracted without having any tortuosity with which it is wrapped up in the parts, and is not according to rightness according to how I have said; then cut that one completely on all sides of its tortuosity and of the spots where it is wrapped up, and then suspend that one by a knife within so that you can raise it completely.
And keep in mind that the section which you make should not be made on the vein or on the patient' blood; for it is difficult for you to raise that one; and use your prudence carefully.
The shape of the incision which is dried up wine:
It is not suitable for you to cut with such a knife or of such an acute point so that the vein may be injured; and it is of great flexibility like gold, because if it were too fine, it would injure the vein by its fineness; and it remains in a superfluous grossness thus far as I have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in dry lands as the Arabs say, and in the arid lands of little moisture and in which there is neither grass nor shade.
And it is very strong when generated in other parts of the body outside the legs.
And its generation is of decomposition which comes from inside the body like snakes and worms and beetles and lice which are generated between the leg and the flesh.
And the sign of the coming of this disease is a violent inflammation of the vein; and then the place is swollen; and then the vein comes out from that swollen place which resembles the root of a plant.
And then, as you come to the end, cover that one piece of lead with which it is said that the weight of two dragons is on its feet.  (It should be noted) that this lead is suspended from the chest.
And as many times as there is a reason for it to be wrapped at its ends, wrap it in lead and then weigh it up. And if it is prolonged, then cut one part of the leg and wrap it up; and do not cut that one from which root it may come out, because if you cut it, it will be contracted and will enter into the flesh and will cause a pus and a sore at that place and a malignant ulceration.
For that it seems necessary to remove him gradually and carefully, until he is completely extracted from the patient's body without causing any harm to the patient.
And of this vein, I have seen some men who are in their 20s and 30s, and already it has come to me that they should be treated with x palms and not more.
And if it is scarred in the hour of its treatment, then insert the blade into the patient's navel and pierce that long way through the body, so that all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrid medicine at the site for a few days; and then cure that with the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes causes sharp rashes, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot itself, and comes out as a sharp hole, and is extracted from each hole slowly.
And therefore cure that one so well as we have said above, and at the same time administer medicine that is mentioned below.
Of the section on diseases generated under the skin and called bovine disease.
This disease is called in some countries bovine disease because it causes a small worm to appear in the body and it creeps all over the body and dissolves the flesh, and shows itself clearly with the movement of the heart in member after member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, and thus worms, snakes, earthworms, and roundworms occur in the stomach.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and comes out through the mouth, then a sharp rash appears in it, and it destroys the tongue, and where it passes, worms appear.
And therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, do not do it unless you have their movement and appearance at hand, and then find that one and tighten it above it and squeeze it tightly, and then dry it on it and extract it.
And if it is immersed in the flesh and you do not see it, then pause a cauterization over the site where it lies, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of the patient as we have said above.
May you see that creature come out at the mouth, then tighten it above the cheek with a tight grip, and then dry it off, and extract it; and if the patient uses laxatives of the body to evacuate the bad humors, and keeps away from foods that cause putrefaction.
Of the section on disease in the neck.
This disease is called in our country "nafir", and it is a painful disease that is felt in some members, and then it changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second one as I recommended to you. You have called one sick woman to a village, and you saw her arms swelling and noticed a small inflammation in the vein of her arm, and for an hour, it went up slowly like living silver moving from place to place.
And then he sat still at the site of pain and became stiff in the muscle, and then it relaxed for a full hour.
Then it moved into the other arm from which it came.
Then I was told to turn it over from side to side, as you saw; and I was very amazed by the change in it and by its speed from member to member. You have already seen that second one as I recommended to you, but I also saw the strange way in which it was moving its limbs, and I have seen even stranger ways in which it has changed members. But I did not see that in the woman.
And you did not think that it was air because the woman was old, with a few hearts and open veins, and in this way the wind is felt at her feeling.
It is necessary that it does not appear according to this reverse cure in those who are delicious and have thin veins.
And if you want to heal it and the patient feels pain, do not appear in front of him as we have said above; then tighten it and dry it off where it is, and then stop that wind from moving, and cauterize the site.
But if you do not see that it is a thin-hearted woman, then heal it with the extraction of the body and the water that it expels, and ingest the pills made from soap, sesame seeds, and similar things.
Of the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are different depending on the spices, and depending on the sites of the body where they are hit, because their difference is that some of them have large tips, small ones, concave ones, and round ones, and some are solid; and some of their shape has three angles, and those which are in the form of tongues.
And the hair of the head is when it hits the arrow and goes through the bone, and comes out from the nape, which happens because of the violent pain, and dizziness, and loss of speech, and vomiting of blood, and then it becomes separated from its word, and is destroyed by rot, and a white moisture similar to pus comes from it, and remains of it in the flesh.
And therefore, if you appear to you these hair, then you abstain from treatment and from extracting the arrow, unless it is outside.
But the arrow hits in the heart, so that it is close to the left side, and feels like it has stuck to a hard cause, and does not feel like a wound; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of a pulse, and passes the black plague, and causes that coldness in the extremities, and a biting feeling, and syncope, and then if you know that death comes in two takes.
And the hair when the arrow has struck the chest, it is very likely to feel a spasm of plague, and the vessels that are close to the throat begin to burst, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales great breath, and seeks fresh air.
And if the arrow hits the vein that is in the foot, and the pain then comes to the small sides, and makes a great sound with pain and a sigh, and all of the muscles do not feel good.
And if the arrow hits in the stomach, then there is a great pain with an uncomfortable digestive disease.
And if the arrow hits in the belly, and it is stuck there, then there is a breach of plague or bladder or intestines which are torn apart, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow from the belly.
And if the dart hits the bladder and urine comes out immediately, and it seems to him that there is some cause for it to come out immediately, and the pain in the patient is strong, then know that it is deadly.
Nor the other members when it is face, neck, jaw, shoulders and adductors, and the spine and its assistant bones, and the hip bone, and the pelvis, and their like of the members, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the dart does not hit a vein or an artery and is not a poisonous dart.
And I will recommend to you that I have seen the essence of these darts, so that you know how to treat it well.
The cause is that, when a man hits a dart in the lacrimal of his eye on the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him from another part, I left his ear intact, and it was cured, and did not happen to his eye anything.
And I extracted another dart from a Jew which hit him in his ear, leaving the eyelid intact, and the dart was hidden, and it did not happen to him anything but a small bit attached to his lid, and it was a sharp dart of the Turks with a lion's head on it, which was not attached to his ears.
And then he is the Jew, and did not happen to his eye any bad accident.
And I extracted another dart from a Christian which fell on his jaw, and it was an Arabic dart, and that is the one which has ears; and then I hid it between two guides, and it had already submerged in his jaw; and then I extracted it carefully, and it healed the Christian.
And I extracted another dart from a man which hit him in his belly, and I thought he would die of it; and then, since it had been thirty days and did not change on him for any cause of its dispositions, I hid the dart and put it under it, and it was healed, and did not happen to him anything bad.
And I saw another man in whom a dart hit him on his back, and the plague was consolidated on him, and then he had eight years passed since then, and the dart hit him in the pelvis.
And I saw a woman hit by a dart in her belly, and the plague was consolidated inside of her, and did not change its dispositions in part, and the woman was not harmed at all in some of her natural operations.
And I saw another man who was hit by a dart in his face and the plague consolidated and broke the dart, not causing him much pain, but it looks like this.
And I extracted the dart from the prince of the king which hit him in his nostril and had already declined on the right side a little bit, and the whole dart was hidden.
And I was called to treat it immediately after three days.
And then I turned the plague of the dart by a subtle attempt; and then I did not feel that; but he felt a punch in his right ear, and then he expected that that punch was from the end of the dart.
And I applied an ointment to the place with a soothing and digestive action, assuring myself that the place would turn red for me so that it appears to me the place where the dart hit, so that it heals on it.
And did not happen to the place any significant accident which the dart hit that place; and I continued applying ointment to it for many days and no accident happened; and the plague was consolidated in the meantime, and broke the nose of its own accord after a space of ten days until one day he felt the dart from his nose and gave me again.
And then I applied to the plague an acute corrosive medicine for many days and no more happened until it was well; and by a trial, I tried that, and I turned the extreme end of the dart with a subtle, which was attached to its lid.
And I adjusted to the plague by that acute medicine until it appeared to me clearly the extreme end of the dart, and then passed from me again for a space of time within four months.
And then the plague became more serious, and I forced it out with pliers, and in the end of the chapter, I extracted it; and then I restored that plague.
And some doctors argued that the cartilage of his nose was not restored, and I restored it and the plague was consolidated, and healed the disease completely, and did not leave it in him for any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some darts for which you pause here and that is not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood by me, since the definitions of those are not understood in that book.
And the expert knows little about it; and on me that is presented what is absent; and the new operation and the new instruments are found by the descent of foreign causes when they happen.
So then I say that darts are not fired from the members in which they are stuck, but according to two ways: either by the attraction of the place where it is inserted or by the opposite direction of the other party.
And that dart which is fired by the place enters, or it is a sharp dart in the flesh, and it is thrown and shot out.
And if you do not obey the hour in which it hits, then be aware that after a few days you will find meat around it, and that attraction of it and its exit is not clear.
And seemingly if it is stuck in the bones and does not obey you to the hour of the hit, then leave that for a few days and return to the attraction and moisture every day, and it has already been shot out.
And if you do not obey your hour of the hit after a few days, then be aware that you pierce the course of the dart in the whole bone of the entire part with a subtle journey, and then extract it.
But if the dart is stuck in its own place and it is painful, then you try that with a certain number of instruments suitable for attracting it; and if you feel that pain, then you shoot those at the end of the dart with pliers or another instrument convenient for attracting it.
And if you cannot stand it because of the plague's constriction and its length, and there are neither bones nor nerves nor veins, then you will have to apply to the plague until it is larger and can be extracted by the dart.
And if they are attached to the ears which have been injured, then release the flesh in which it is lodged from all sides by making use of all the tools you can; and invent yourself a way, if you cannot find one, of releasing the flesh in the injury to the ear and turning those parts inside out until they become soft.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use your hand to twist it with forceps from all sides until it softens; and carefully at the back so that the arrow does not break and that it can be extracted with difficulty by you and that extraction.
And if you cannot manage that of your own hand, then leave it for a few days until the wounds heal that are in its path, and then repeat that procedure when it is relieved. Otherwise, if you have pain from the flow of blood, then administer the water that we spoke about in the first chapter for relief.
And keep your virtue of incision away from veins or nerves, or strings, and administer the tools to you as much as possible in order to avoid the arrow; and make water easy and calm and late and firm at will and remind you and advise you.
And so that the arrow is turned back in order for the patient to be arranged according to the figure according to which the position of the arrow in it should be determined, because it is more useful. Otherwise, if this is not possible for you, then administer the water that is possible for you by figures.
Otherwise, those arrows that are shot from the opposite side, or which already hit one of the parts from outside, or make the tip of the arrow light by touching the part above the knuckle and turning it; then cut it off; and do so according to the amount in which the forceps grasp; and then throw it away, because it is made light by little.
Otherwise, if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand according to the opposite direction in which the arrow enters the bone, and increase it inwardly, and then extract it.
Otherwise, leave it for a few days, and then repeat that procedure until it is heated.
And if the head of the arrow is in that place, then push it towards the patient.
Otherwise, if the head is fallen and you want to administer impact, then insert it, if it is deaf, a thick object so that it enters between the concave part of it and the arrow head; and push it towards the patient.
Otherwise, if the arrow is concave, then push it with a strong object that enters into it, because the arrow is relieved by it.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then cover all the flesh in which it is located with vinegar, if you can, and then treat it with water that you consider necessary.
And if the arrow has entered into the foot, or into the belly, or into the bladder, or into the rib, and is near to touching it, so that you can touch it with your hand, then cut off that part, and keep away from cutting veins or nerves, and extract it; and if it hurts, then treat it until it heals.
Shape of forceps for arrows to be shot:
Their ends of their beaks made with awl are formed with pliers when they grasp the arrow so that it does not slip.
And of these are formed small nuts, large, few and smaller, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its narrowness, and the width of the wound, and the contraction thereof.
as well as a ray in order for the arrow to be relieved inside it and thrust towards that one.
Of bloodletting from veins.
The veins of bloodletting from which usual bleeding occurs: of those in the head: And of these are found two pulsating veins that run to the ears, saying "ah"; two herbs that grow in the middle of the head; and two veins that run through the two temples from the front, and a vein at the top of the forehead, and a vein at the tip of the nose; and two guides that run along the cheekbones; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and - these are the veins that are called "alglic" -; and two veins that run along the tongue. Otherwise, the veins to be bloodlet from the arms are: 5. And of these is a cerebral vein, and it should be taken from the wild horse; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and deaf, and it is a migrain vein, and it consists of one ramification from the basilic, and another ramification from the cerebral; and they name that one "all-over," and they call those ones the vulgar "vein of the belly"; and the veins of the arms, and it is paused over the fire, and it is that which is bloodlet from, and it is that which appears above the pussy by a clear sign; and the save, and it is the vein that runs between the little auricular and the smallest one, and so on.
And in the foot and the chest are three veins; the one of those is that which goes from the back side of the wild horse; and the second is a sciatic vein, and its place is from the front side of the domestic horse; and there is a vein on the chest similar to those.
The appearance of veins that run along the ears is due to the smallness of the animal, and the emigration and the swelling of the head in ancient times was caused by the bad breath and ulcers of the head.
And the quality of feeling those veins is according to your advice: it should be rasied up the hair of the patient, and rubbed in a good way at the back of the head in the place of both veins so that they are touched by the comb with a wide edge; then tie the hair of the patient with a knot in order for them not to appear; and if you want to feel those veins with your fingers, and if you feel the pulse of those with your fingers, here is the pulse.
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else: Then raise your hand up to the vein and the joint until you reach the top, and cut the vein with a sharp blade. And the length of the cut is the amount of two fingers or less from water; and make a loop with the thread as large as you want it.
Then tighten the knot and leave it there to heal.
And already, at the beginning of this book, the cuts and their cauterization have been described.
Of the two veins that are cut with bloodletting - the ancient emigre, the evil and the frequent headaches and acute effluents that flow into the vessels.
And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what I recommend to you: tighten the patient's leg with a knot until the two veins appear at the pulse, and then try it yourself.
Then raise the joint open to the vein at the top with a sharp knife, and insert the bloodletting into it, and raise the vein up; and cut those same with a sharp blade in the two veins; and run off the blood according to the amount of your need.
Then remove the cord from around the patient' leg, and place it on the vein for an hour, and then put a knot and tighten it sharply, and leave that there to heal.
And already, at the beginning of this book, their memory has been described, and their cuts, and their cauterization.
And therefore, the bloodletting of the vein in the forehead is to be done with bloodletting on the cephalic artery for ancient headaches and sore eyes and emigre, rigor, and putrid ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting for him is according to what I recommend to you; but if the patient tightens his leg with a knot until the vein appears; and take this instrument which is called a scissor, of which this form is:
Then place the point of the scissors eminent at the top of the vein and strike it sharply with a hammer or in another way to make it run off according to the amount you want; then remove the hole from around the patient' leg, and leave that there to heal.
And some have performed bloodletting laterally, but it is not known that bloodletting is of extreme importance in this way as in the others; for the bone is hard and strong, and would break a small bloodletting.
Of the two veins that are cut with bloodletting - the lacrimal veins of two eyes for the skin of the eye for rigor and inflammation in the eyes, and to ancient headaches of the face.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient tightens his leg with a knot, and then bloodlet it; and you stand on top of it.
And the bloodletting is done according to the transverse length at a little amount, because there is no flesh in that place; and if the bloodletting is subtle, the extreme end of it is broken.
Then let the blood run as much as you need it; and place those knots on them, and tighten them with a hammer, and then remove those.
Of the bloodletting of the nose vein is associated with acute fever and violent dizziness, and ancient headaches and emigre and rigor that occur in the face, and mainly when it is old.
And the quality of bloodletting for him is that the patient tightens his leg with a knot, and then take the nose with your left hand; and take a subtle bloodletting long, and place it in its usual place on the top of the nose according to the direction, because the vein does not appear here, and because the blood begins to flow after a while.
And then remove your hand from the bloodletting little by little and let the blood run according to your need; and then tie that with a knot, because it is restored slightly.
Of the bloodletting of two veins is to be done with a sharp knot, and at the beginning of leprosy and the start of motus headaches and bad diseases and corrosive ulcers; and to heal them.
And the quality of bloodletting for them is that the patient tightens each leg with a knot in his leg; and place the doctor on top of the patient' head, and let the patient lie on a bed.
Then bloodlet the vein long with a large bloodletting little by little; and then let off blood according to the season or water as much as needed it; and then do the same for the other vein.
Then remove the knot and tighten both legs with a tight grip so that the patient is not choked, and leave them inside until the disease is healed.
Of the bloodletting of those veins is to cure the diseases of the mouth  - small pimples and pus, and the corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and the bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the rest of it.
And the quality of bloodletting for them is that you wash the patient' face in front of you, and tighten his leg with a knot, and then turn his lips and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other is on the left; and the demonstration of each is by its blackness, and more so because those veins are small black ones; and then cut each with a sharp blade.
Then if you are in doubt, leave it to be cut by a sharp blade; and then determine which is the most prominent of those, and which is the pus that comes out of them.
Then make the shape of the two veins in his lips.
Of the two veins that are cut on the tongue, the bloodletting of the cephalic artery is to cure the lockjaw that is in the throat, and the headache of the uvula, and the headaches of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting for them is that you place your hand between his two legs in front of the sun, and lift his tongue up, and look at his tongue from both sides, and the color of each is turning to blackness.
Then bloodlet each one; and be careful not to take your hand off those veins, because they are arteries.
And your veins that are bloodlet in the neck are the ones that run in all men, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two ways, or put a knot on the bloodletting long, or cut it with a sharp knife, and then see if it stops; and this is the way:
Let them lie on their backs sometimes and make it easier to open the concave veins that are full of thick blood and turn those that contain large amounts of black blood.
And this type of bleeding is of little depth and subtle in its extremities; it is suitable for draining veins that contain subtle amounts of yellow blood.
It is the improvement of the draining of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: it removes the bad blood that comes from the groin and goes up to the neck, and from there that affects the feet and the abdomen.
And let the flubotomy surgeon, when performing that procedure, be careful and keep it in mind, because there is an artery there, and if he makes a mistake or adjusts the puncture for flubotomy, he will cut that artery and cause blood to flow; so it is necessary that he does not make a mistake when puncturing for flubotomy, otherwise he will cut it with a sharp instrument.
And if the basilic does not appear clearly, then let him know that he should lay it down and move to the other one, or look for a branch; or perform flubotomy at the end of the arm, since that is clear, and do so with a sharp instrument while lying on their back sometimes.
And if you want to perform the flubotomy of that arm, then let him know that he should put his hand forward and touch the area where he knows the location of the wrist, and place it on it; then take the arm and cut the vein with a sharp instrument while lying on their back sometimes, as mentioned above; and be careful not to hit the percussion for a short distance in that area.
And when you stretch it with strength, blow in the area that you have covered with your hand; then that inflation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore let it go.
And if the blood flows like a child’s breath during flubotomy as mentioned above, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and let him rest his hand on that area for a long time; and then remove his hand, and if the blood stops flowing, as it is seen to have stopped, then let him stretch the arm and leave it like that.
And protect the patient from the wetness of the air; and be careful with him, and do not harm him for a few days until he is healed.
And if the blood does not stop flowing, and it is necessary to go to a place where medicine is available; then cut that artery if it appears to you; because its end is contracted, and the blood has stopped; or take a scorta of castor oil, pour it on, and take one-half of it, and stretch it over the location of the vein that has narrowed while stretching it with a string and powder inside for another day.
And then if the blood has stopped flowing, it is good; and if not, then heal him with water from which the memory of the location of the powder that stops the flow of blood begins.
And the difficulty of stopping the blood from flowing is great in such arrangements due to the small location of the pulse and the possibility of stretching the arm.
And from the black vein, the improvement of draining the blood that comes from the head and goes to the body is good; because it is made up of branches of the basilic and cephalica veins, as mentioned above.
And let the flubotomy surgeon be careful when performing flubotomy on that arm, because it is a nerve; and if he makes a mistake in puncturing for flubotomy and damages the nerve, he will cause stupor, and its healing is difficult, and it does not heal completely unless it is shown to someone else; and this nerve appears clearly with the feeling; and if it is overlooked by some people, and it is subtle and does not show itself, then let him stop flubotomizing at that part where he punctures for flubotomy while lying on their back sometimes, and avoid the nerve in front of his shield.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in its length.
The improvement of draining the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and prevents bad blood from the ears.
In this particular case, if you want to perform the flubotomy of this vein by puncturing like olive or by piercing; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not contain nerves or arteries.
However, it is difficult to treat a person if he does not get an injection during the first punch, but you do not notice that an injection has been made.
The first of these is that you must know that flubotomy should not be administered unless it is done with the preservation of health and in the hope of its recovery, and that it be performed at the beginning of spring, summer, or autumn; and towards winter, it should be stopped when there are signs of accumulation.
And flubotomy should be performed on the third day or at the earliest on the first day, from three hours after dawn.
The flubotomy that is administered should be done at a convenient and necessary time, whether it is a new day or not; throughout the day and all the time.
And if you do not want to be flubotomized until the age of twelve years, and women should not be flubotomized before they are seven years old; and those who have already passed sixty years should not be flubotomized.
And if someone wants to be flubotomized by any method, he should mark his Budels in advance of the flubotomy with a leather rope, if there is a cut that has been held, so that the veins do not drain excess fluid during the flubotomy of the Budels, which are useless, and do not affect the main members.
And do not flubotomize the patients who have a fever, nor those who are drunk or sick; and do not flubotomize those who vomit, or have abdominal pain, or have many children or work, or stay up late, or for any other reason that destroys their strength; or if they are in a state of weakness, or if they are weak-willed, or if they lack willpower.
And consider the subtle qualities of the air in advance if the blood is thick, and the food and drinks, and the medicines if it can be to the patient's benefit.
And enter the bath if there is no reason to prohibit it, or exercise for any exercise that makes the blood thin.
And stop flubotomizing on the feet of the day; it is at three o'clock in the afternoon, as mentioned above.
And let the feet of that arm be preserved on that day from all kinds of animal accidents, such as anger, fear, and pain; and from all unnecessary work and children, and resembling their appearance.
And on the same day, let the causes of these things be present in the use of the air that is common to all people, with its aromas and scents, and with balms and resembling them according to the amount of possibility.
Then follow the fluiton on a cushion that has been placed or that it is the same as the cushion of that one that should be used for fluiton.
Then he will remove the patient's arm and rub it with the fluiton two or three times; then he will tighten the joint with a strap and wrap that one with two bands.
And if the constriction is early on, because the constriction when it is not tight or when the constriction is too much, then it is forbidden to wash the leg; or if it is very soft and it is forbidden to touch the leg with a cloth.
Then follow the constriction, and if that one who should be used for fluiton rubs his hands together between them so that the veins are swollen and appear to the touch.
Then he will rub his fluiton with a little oil of its own; and then place his right hand on the patient' right vein where he wants to perform the procedure, pause at that point so that the blood flows a little, and then stops because from those veins comes the most noise when they are squeezed; and if he stops, the fluiton does not hurt him, and if it hurts him, it is because he stopped too late.
So then, when the fluiton stops and is tensed in all these causes.
Then stop the fluiton, maybe if the vein is in a crease, then do not stop; but if not, return to another crease a little away from that place or on top of it, if the place does not have a fold.
And if the place is inflamed or the patient' legs are swollen, then leave it alone for a day or two and do not tighten the joint because it will cause pain; nor wash it with water.
Then repeat the fluiton if he tolerates it.
And if the feeling is small and subtle and you fear that it will not hurt as much as you want, then repeat the fluiton in that same place again, but adjust a little in the sensation, and do so gently before the place is inflamed, because the place is inflamed when it is inflamed for most men it takes very little to make them feel pain.
But if that one has already been inflamed, then do not repeat on it, because there is no excuse for you to do so; and pause over some part of the foot's joint where oil can be seen because it makes the body feel relief. And that is better in this place than oil or any other oil.
And it seems that administering oil in any part of the procedure has to be avoided because it is forbidden to tighten the joint of the leg and to put tar and sage on it when you stop from one of those places because the leg is swollen and turns red when tightened.
And if in the place of the fluiton is caused a great inflammation, because it is caused by creases and mainly at that one which bleeds but not that one which is swollen or has an inflammation on its surface, and then stop and pause over the inflamed part with a sponge soaked in salt water and slightly burned, and tighten it for an hour because it dissolves.
Then when he makes water, follow the vein that comes out of the leg with a stream of water or another vein.
And if it remains in that place for several days some black or green, then do not wash it with water; and if you want to, pause over some part of the foot' joint where you can put aloes and myrrh dissolved, or aniseed and calamus or something similar.
And so that is what happens in the procedure for the foot' joints: some swellings and nodules, which are called gout, can be caused by the basilica.
And so follow your hand over that place and if you feel any softness, then pause with your hand on that part where the soft feeling is felt, then that eminence is evil and bad; and then keep your hand off that part, because it will hurt a lot to pour water from the artery of the leg.
And make a paste out of water in which you tighten it and then treat that part with another treatment until it is healed.
Then follow the leg out of the patient' body according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing on it above the leg according to what appears.
Because if the leg is black, then leave it alone until it rots and if you want to, if it is swollen, then leave it alone until it becomes soft and if it is hot, then leave it alone until it cools down.
And if that one is full and hard and needs to be extracted from the leg in a crease, then the procedure of taking the vein and the fluiton should be performed slowly.
And if that one is swollen, then do the opposite of what has been said, and if it needs to be extracted from several creases, then perform the procedure in a careful manner because it is very delicate.
And the best thing for performing the vein procedure is to make a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this way of performing the procedure saves the leg from gout and nerve damage, and it is more salutary and effective than the procedure according to its length and depth.
And at which time the fainting is usually caused by the procedure, and if you want to, before performing the procedure, put a little water of milk or some simple syrup on a sponge and burn it slightly; and then extract from the leg in three creases or four.
And if the body is cold and stiff, then put a little water in front of the procedure to soften it with oil of myrrh or with oil of roses or with other aromatic oils; or with scented oil mixed with spices like cinnamon, ginger and nutmeg and something similar.
And if the fainting is caused by the procedure, and it is a cause of the leg's blood flowing out, then follow the previous instructions about making water to soften the body before the procedure with scented oil mixed with almonds, and make your feet wet with it as well.
And use the other causes we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
And if you want to treat your arms and dissolve the leg' problem according to the second cause, then follow the procedure for making water to soften the body with scented oil mixed with almonds, and make it flow out little by little, day after day, according to its quantity of virtue.
But if you want to treat your arms and get rid of the leg' problem according to the second cause, and your body is strong, then follow the procedure for making water to soften the body with aromatic oil mixed with almonds, and make it flow out after seven or nine hours from the first procedure.
But if you want to send the leg away from your body in the opposite direction of the joint where it hurts and it remains so on the third day, then follow the procedure for making water to soften the body with scented oil mixed with almonds, and make it flow out after three days.
And if that leg is swollen and hot and it hurts a lot because it causes fainting, then follow the leg out of the patient' body where it hurts most and tighten it very much so that it does not hurt him anymore; and then stop the fluiton because if it hurts someone it will be bad for them to die in a place instead of fainting.
And if you want to treat your arms and get rid of the problem according to the third cause, and it is already closed because the vein has been cut off and it is difficult to get the leg out of the leg, then press hard over that part with vehemence and extend it a little, because water is too bad for you.
Here is the translation of the text:
And if the vein is bloated, then leave it alone and don't touch it until the swelling goes down.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood with a second application, and it is no excuse, then apply it to that place or in another part of the body in some other vein.
And the vein called "the bracelet of the arm" is to be punctured in a location other than the fold or crease, as it is composed of those veins.
The quality of the bloodletting is that the patient's hand goes into cold water immediately after, so that it does not swell and so that the vein appears clearly.
Then tighten it gently with a strap around the hand above or below the place where the vein appears, and apply bloodletting according to the small transverse line, not longitudinally or along its length.
And then the opening is large and your bloodletting is done from the joint of the hand a little way up.
And if the flow of blood must be stopped, then you repeat the hand in cold water and leave the blood to run into the water until you satisfy your need.
Maybe if you are in the summer season, then you are excused from repeating the hand in cold water, but the fast is kept in cold water during winter.
And the bloodletting from this vein is safer than that of any other vein, because it does not contain a pulsating vein or nerve.
And the bloodletting from the right wrist is associated with the symptoms of the stomach.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that you tighten the hand gently or with your own hand, as it was placed in cold water, so that the vein swells and becomes clearly visible; then apply bloodletting according to a small transverse line, not longitudinally or along its length, and if you cut that vein from all sides, you will not see the blood come out.
And remember that you do not finish the hand with bloodletting, because it has nerves that are exposed and without protection of flesh.
Then repeat the hand in cold water and let the blood run into that place, because if you do not repeat the hand in cold water, the blood will clot in the vein's opening, and it will stop flowing.
And when the blood is drawn according to the quantity of necessity, then place your hand over olive and salt oil so that it does not harden completely; and apparently cover all parts of it evenly.
Maybe the refreshment of bloodletting from the left wrist is that it is associated with the symptoms of the body.
Do the same thing for bloodletting on this side as you did for the other side.
And the benefit of bloodletting from the saphenous vein is to the symptoms that are in the legs, as well as to the mother's symptoms, and the retention of menstruation, and the similar symptoms of rashes and sores on thighs and legs, and their similarity to the symptoms of old wounds.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient puts his hand in cold water and makes a friction on it until the veins appear; then place your hand over the joint of the arm with a bandage; and the place where the vein appears cut it slightly, and from there it branches out on the surface of the arm.
And so bloodletting is done most widely and away from the edge of the skin, because it is better and safer to do so, as it is more pleasant and cleaner.
And if you bloodlet from the surface of the arm, then you protect yourself from the nerves that are exposed on the surface of the arm, and apply bloodletting according to the small transverse line, as though you were cutting it with a knife.
And it is safe.
Maybe if the blood must not be seen, then you repeat the arm in cold water and let the blood run into that place before it is drawn out.
And if the bloodletting instrument makes a mistake in the first attempt, then repeat it slightly on the surface, because the place is safe; and do not worry about it hurting, but protect yourself from the nerves as we have said above.
And similarly bloodletting is done from the other leg in a similar way to this one.
And from the sciatic vein, the place we have mentioned is away from the edge of the hip bone.
And the benefit of bloodletting from this leg is that it helps with pain in the hips when done during a fever.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient goes into a bath, and quickly and firmly tighten his belt from the bottom of the hips up to four inches above it with a long thin strap, because it does not appear clearly unless done so.
And when it appears, then you apply bloodletting with a second application of the same tool that was used for the first application and in the same way, because it is better; or cut that vein from all sides, because the place is safe.
And it is done in men of mild temperament; and if that vein does not appear clearly, then apply bloodletting to any part of the leg, and this is what appears at the top of the foot next to the ear lobe and the ring finger.
And protect yourself from the nerves, and let the blood run out in the amount you want.
Then remove the bandage and tighten the place where the bloodletting was done, because it is easier to heal it tightly.
Of windiness and of the qualities of using those.
Of windiness: from corns, or from eczema, or from veils.
And windiness is done in two ways: one is bloodletting and removal of blood, and the other is bloodletting with the skin being scraped off.
And this windiness that is done by scraping is done in two ways, because it is either done with fire or without fire.
And the places where windiness is administered by bloodletting and removal of blood are twelve parts of the body, the first being the crown, and the last being the base of the neck; and the middle part between them; and the lower lip on the left side of the jaw, and the upper lip on the right side; and the two spatulas; and the alohosts, which are above the collarbone; and the two chins; and the two cheeks.
And windiness does not remove blood from the main veins, but it removes it from small veins in the flesh, and for this reason it is done by bloodletting; nor does it bring about a change in the quality of the body when done by fire, or without fire, in order to relieve symptoms.
Maybe if necessity compels you to apply windiness for a disease or continuously, then apply it at the beginning of the meal and at the end of it, and in the middle part as well; and in any place that is convenient.
And if at any time for one of those reasons, and particularly if it is in the third or middle part of the month, then order that ventilation be done before it has passed two or three hours.
The relief of the neck's ventilation is when that weight comes to the head and goes down the throat; but above all, it is necessary to evacuate everything from the body.
This ventilation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
It is not good to use it on those who are inflamed or in whom there is catarrh, because it causes great pain.
And above all, do not use it on the old, and in those heads in which there are ulcers.
But to that who is under it continuously, there is relief; and above all, you order the ventilator that he pause his hand for a little while from the ventilation at the patient's legs, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But ventilation of alcohol is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the bazilian: and above all, it gives to asthma, and to the constriction of breath and to the breaking of the instrument of breath, and to cough, and to swelling.
And if it is stopped with alcohol a little while, because if it is paused from the sides, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventilation of alcohol gives pain in the head and blindness, emigration, pre-focus, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the bazilian.
And if you order the ventilator that he does not press his hand on the sacrifice for him to not cut the artery and cause blood flow.
And ventilation of the sides gives alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and mockery of the diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of elsewhere which is not in the two lips.
But ventilation that is made on the two spatulas gives caphutan, which is done by the filling of quality.
And ventilation of the two inner sides of the teeth gives youth from phlebotomy of three veins, for it is of the bazilian, dark and cephalic; because those veins are drawn with more blood than those of the flesh, and these smaller veins than the others within that they arrive at the attraction to the three veins.
And you order the ventilator that he does not go forward in the sacrifice, for the place is naked of flesh, and leaves them his nerves and arteries.
It is a ventilation to the which is ventilated on the buttocks and gives to hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to ulcers from the sides.
And if you order the ventilator that it is great ventilation, and that it is of arnica, for the place deserves a strong section; and strong goes with subtle ventilation and does not go forward in the sacrifice for the sacrifice.
But small ventilation of the legs with manifest caution, for they attract the blood from all over the body, and give old pains of the chest and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and give both or urination; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of two veins, and of a horse-biting, and of two knots.
But they leave the whole body disfigured and cause fainting in men.
And of the ventilation of horse-biting, its advantage is to the advantage of ventilation of two legs.
And the quality of the position of the ventilations is that you pause the ventilation at the beginning and let it go through a little water in advance, and do not prolong the position of the ventilations, but rather pause them gently, and leave them carefully, and let the humors come to their place by arrival after. And do not stop it repeatedly and continue inside that you see the place become red and swell and that the rigor of the blood appears.
Then order sacrifice and repeat the little water little by little, and consider carefully the position of the bodies.
For that man who is of tender flesh of rabbits, you order him to sacrifice one time and not more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And order the ventilator to increase the sacrifice a little, and make it easily.
And if the blood is thick, then order two sacrifices; for in the first sacrifice it opens the way of subtilization to the blood and to its liquidity. But in the second to the acquired scrutinizing of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is ferment, then order sacrifice the third time so that it obtains the last one.
Finally, when we want to extract the little blood little by little or a little, it is enough to us one sacrifice.
And if we want to extract from one blood, sacrifice by the abundant sacrifice; and if we know that the blood is thick, then order abundant sacrifice.
The term of sacrifice in which is the depth of the cut only.
And if the flesh of that person is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are small; then the places of ventilation are gentle, open, and resolute; if it is in summer, then such oil as aloe or violet, or tiny flowers, or butter's milk; and if it is winter, then olive oil, or lavender, or chamomile, or garlic, and to those which smell.
And if the superfluity is thick, frothy, then the oil is violet, or myrrh, or aloe, or aniseed, and to their scents.
But if the ventilator has small pores of tender flesh, then it is forbidden to use oil, and that the places of ventilation are close with strong water or with fresh water of salt or with milk of butter, and to those which smell.
And if the blood is of a moist nature, then wash your ventilations with wine or with water of mirth and sumach, and similar to those.
And if the superfluities are thick, then wash your ventilations with wine of old or with water of fennel, which is marjoram, or aniseed, or chamomile, and to their scents.
And if the ventilation is kept forward of a bath; after it has been given to the person who is about to be bathed within an hour or two, and if he sleeps close to the ventilation.
What is necessary for him to be ruled by the ventilator before ventilation.
Consider at the beginning: then if the ventilator or the one who will phlebotomize is coleric and ventilates on the head with inflammation, then order that it be done with cold water, and with a little vinegar and lettuces, and dry bread, and ale, and to their scents.
And pause your meals such as peas, and meat of lambs, and prepared foods with herbs, and to those which smell.
And if the complex is frothy, then order to drink sweet water or water of almond with a little bit of sumac, and that it is commanded that he use little water and eating, and pause your meals of peas and herbs, and wine between vine and noonday; and that it be commanded that he eat meat in the afternoon and evening, and pause drinking and eating.
And when it is cold or a surgical procedure is performed, drink more water than food.
And if it is given in drink to some men a kind of medicine called 'tyriaca' or 'alpharac', or musc, or alcelta before surgery or before a procedure, so that the main limbs are comfortable and the wound is healed; and do not let them cut their skin.
Then the cuts that are made should be stopped, and on the foot, and on the hernia, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, because these members do not suffer from cutting.
And do not want it on them but to attract the pain of a member, and thus stop the wound when cutting the mamilla in the malautia of the flux of the wound of the member of the nars; and use that so that the wound is dissolved, and so stops the wound because it heals with wounds.
And it is stopped on the chest when it happens to them in their illness or pox, because by virtue of its strong attraction, it lightens their pain and removes the pox from its place.
And it seems to me that when it is stopped on the foot and the hernia, there should be a wind-stopping in those who are imprisoned by them.
And these winds are administered with juice alone, and some are administered with fire.
And some are filled with boiling water in the malautias of the hernia.
And water is used to fill the wound with a greater volume; it is either hot water or water in which herbs have been boiled, suitable for drinking.
Form of wound administered with fire: it is the width of the orifice that we have formed; and the quantity of the medicine should be half a palm; and in the middle of it, in the place where it is in the circuit, the most part, the tract should be small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
It is made of roasted roe or citron, of large margins, lion, bull and boar, so that it does not harm the member due to its position on it.
And in the middle of it, a transverse stick of roe or iron is placed, where it is stopped when lit by fire.
And this wound should be much greater than that which we have mentioned above; and the smaller one, less according to the malautias and the state of that person who uses it.
And the winds of old men and exhausted people are different from those of young people and large-boned people.
And the quality of stopping this wound with fire on the member is that it extends the hand to the fire of wood properly in front of a small candle of wax, and stops it in the middle of the transverse stick in the middle place of the wound, so that the fire may be kindled by the wind blowing through the hole.
And it is stopped on the member of the patient, and it is placed over the tract that we have said, until when we have wound up the wound, but not so much as to hold the thread and cause the vapor to rise from that tract; then the wound is closed in a moment.
And light the fire according to its way, and do so again if you do not like this one.
Then in the wound that is administered with a poultice, with water, and it is stopped on the member only when it is filled with water, and it is stopped over the member alone.
And this is the way to do it: And this wound, how great it is, so much the better, so that it receives a large quantity of water.
Chapter 77.
Sanguineous wounds are not administered in motz members, but in members where it is impossible to place wind-stops because of their smallness; or, as it seems to them, by the nose and mouth when they are naked.
And the quality of using those which you have found is that they are in the clean water of pox-riddled places.
And they should be laid down in the evening and rinsed twice in clean water before they become hungry, and so that no harm is done to their navel; and they are emptied out of the body at the beginning of surgery and blood-letting, and are stopped over it.
And when it is stopped, it is filled again.
And if it is possible to take juice from the place where the wound is, it should be preserved in the bottle.
Then, if not, wash the place with vinegar and prepare water; and have it boiled and pressed.
And if the wound is prolonged in the body of the member, and the blood remains, then dip a cloth in cold water, and stop it over; until the residue has been washed away.
And if the wound multiplies, then sprinkle on it vitriol that is trised, or fry and seemly to it for stinging causes; until the wound has dried up; or stop it over the place where there are many beans of eggs, and they should be laid down before the beans adhere to the place; and the wound is dried up.
And when necessary, a second or third application of blood-letting, whenever possible, changing those used.
And if blood-letting is forbidden by suspension, then wash the place with fresh blood or a needle placed in the places where it hurts, and stop it over; because these when they feel pain, so do those who have stopped them, for a moment only.
And when you want to make it fall off, sprinkle on those a little dried aloe that is trised, or salt, or ash; and soon after.
Thus begins the process of healing the third part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of a fracture and an accident of displacement in bones.
Or, son, know that this chapter is full of foolishness, and vulgar people; and those who at any time did not look at the freed ones of the Ancient books or read a letter from them.
And for this reason it is written that the way of the sciences of our land is hidden from us; and I have not forgotten any time for reading all of them, and I have studied their understanding very much, until I derived the science from them.
And it has directed me to experiment and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and on which my experiment passed; because it has directed me to open a new way for you, taking away from myself the trouble of elongation; and it opens a new way at the end of opening; and demonstrates in it by adding a declaration, as it did in two preceding chapters.
Chapter 1.
First Chapter: On the Collection of Broken Bones, which, before we begin to comment on the members that are fractured and different from each other, is a necessary premise. So therefore say I in the proem of this chapter: "Let the words of this chapter be known; and let the chapters be understood by those who are skilled in this noble art, and stand firmly on the truth of them; so may you be, and these that follow you, learned in this art."
And therefore I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or grounding occurs, cover yourself from the beginning with the flail or break it, or any combination of the two, if no one prohibits you for some cause, there is a defeat of virtue, or this is the one in which it happens, or he is old and decrepit, or it is a time of violent heat, or of violent rain.
Then let it be content with its own food of herbs and meat of birds and crabs; and forbid thick meats and filling yourself with food and all food that fills the veins with blood, except that you are certain of a cold cautery, and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
Then return the patient to their first position, where they usually rest.
And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, cover it with nutritious food of dry and heavy and thick substance, and with soup made from flour mixed with water, and with roots, and with leaves, and with seeds, and with nuts, and with fresh meat, and with strong and similar foods, and in this regime a coagulatin
You know that broken bones in men who are young and in decrepit people cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of the limbs.
But nature adjusts and connects on the broken bone from the beginning any apparent cause of glut in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it within which are joined together within which comes the end of strength and firmness, as with fire at the beginning, so that no one prohibits such from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's food, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And you know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, as a fracture of the hip bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the leg bone; and similar, all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I remember all the types of fractures, separated in a separate chapter from the other.
There is a diversity of fractures within itself. And the types of fractures of the bone within itself are diverse; for one is made a curved fracture and another that happens in its stars; and some are made according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the skull and the eyelids and the additions, and those from which they do not proceed, as when it is fractured in the pain when it is prepared to write, and the fracture occurs with a plague and disruption in the head, and the fracture is a small fissure.
And all these species are made by nature in the restoration of him, so that it will be remembered in its place.
There is a sign of a fracture of the bone. And this is how a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is tortuosity, and from it the eminence and appearance that comes to the sense, and not by it when you press it with your hand.
And therefore, when it is not in the apparent tortuosity place or is not made, and the patient does not have great pain when you touch the bone with movement, then it is not here a fracture.
When it is possible that it is tortuosity or a small fracture, then do not cover it with your hand and with pressure from all; when you pause the medicines of which you have reminder; and let it be tight by subtle stricture.
And you know that the place when it is arched and does not split into two or another that happens in its satagia, as if it is removed from all of its comparison, then you begin your hour to correct it while it happens to you an aposteme cautery.
And if it happens to you an aposteme cautery, then leave it for a few days until the aposteme stops; and let it be hidden in any way you can of levitation or invention.
And you know that the restoration and agglutination of him is more severe than the bone in which such things happen to him.
Then strengthen it according to what will come later in the memory of it.
But if there are two satagies in the bone, then it is necessary to cut this member that is broken into two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and with your hand.
And be your position in which you pause the member that is placed according to its natural form, while the fractures are extending from the member, then know that you have to return those additions in their places, and in any way you can do it in their positions.
And guard according to your strength that it does not happen to the patient for your operation or injury; and persist according to the superior power that you apply one bone to another with its best forms.
Then, in that hour, you take advantage of touching it with your hand, and if there is any other cause, correct it and hide it according to the quantity of your power.
And cause violent extensions and compressions, as when foolish things happen to the patient that cause an aposteme cautery by his operation, or cause a contraction in the member as we have seen it happen due to the operation of their foolish things.
And the quality of the tightening of the member that I recommend is this; so that you know that broken members are diverse in their size and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small, as with the arm and the leg, and similar to those, then the wrapping is of a thin fabric.
But of those that are large, as with the hip or the back, then in those be a wrapping of both sides and tough, because the binding of one side connects the member with great strength by strenging it with all its parts with a stricture of both sides, rather than not being wrapped.
Then begin, and do your calculations carefully, pause it with care for the patient's comfort, on the position of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the member you desire; and strengthen your hand with a little rope.
Then see how that one begins to be more firm at the position of the fracture, and strengthen your hand with which you have strengthened the position of the fracture. Then slightly extend the skin from the broken area, and soften the tightness little by little, until you feel a slight release.
Then take another object and wrap that second cloth over the first one, wrapping it tightly around the area of the fracture; then place the wrapped part a little further from the fracture than before; and do your operation on the tightness of the first wrapping as well as softening the second one in accordance with what we have said about wrapping up.
Then place between the wraps of stop-leopard or cloth that which is wrapped around the area of the fracture, if there is any curvature in it; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
Then place another object over those wraps, and slightly extend them if there is any swelling or pus in the area, stopping after a while, then pause over that fluid which is causing the swelling and from where it is coming out; leave it for a few days; and then stretch it again.
Then the sticks from which most of them are made should be made of different types of wood, some flexible and others not; or of palm branches; or of bamboo; and the length of each stick should match its shape and size.
However, the stick that is paused over that fracture should be a little thicker and closer to the other sticks than any of them; and its length according to the size and curvature of that limb; and stretch it gently, as we have said about curvature; and it is that tightness according to the location of the fracture, and how much further it is from the fracture, so make that tightness.
Then the strings should be both thinner and softer, and if they are thick, do not pause them with other thick things; for it is a great mistake to feel the tightness equally with fingers that have been stretched;
And very thin strings are not appropriate either, because you will not be able to feel the tightness with those strings; and it is not convenient that there be a gap between one stick and another:
And if the patient is led by the ends of the sticks to feel the tightness in those locations, then pause with stop-leopard or woolen thread between them until that area does not cause him any injury.
Some types of fracture are caused by a sharp blow, and this causes a rupture in the tendon, and I remember that one on the Capitol according to its uniqueness.
And you should know that a broken limb is not stretched with sticks on the first day; for if the limb is large, it will not be able to pause over them until after three, seven, or more days, according to your safety in the event of swelling causing injury.
This is the way that the ancient surgeons used to treat; they paused over a fracture and dislocation and twist.
Method of applying plaster as a shower for fracture treatment, complex in nature and mostly used for females and children, because it is not hot like water; and that is because you take powdered molasses, and this is the flour's medulla, which causes the movement of the millstone in the parts of the stone.
Then prepare it as such, not with thin or soft cloth, but rather with the thick and coarse fabric of hemp, and use that.
Another way to patch up fractures, dislocations, and twists: take a paste of asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, fennel, and milky oak salve, all of which are said to be good for thousand dragons; of myrrh and aloes, one dragon; all of which should be finely ground and mixed with hot or cold water or milk depending on the condition of the patient's body. And then use this paste, since it is a good composition that gently restores broken bones, and gives strength to many people.
Another way to make paste for fractures and twists: take a little milk of an almond tree, a dragon of myrrh, a dragon of aloes, a dragon of fennel, and half a dragon of white poplar sap; all of which are said to be good for thousand dragons.
All of them are made in a mortar to form a paste, and they are mixed with water or milk to make an ointment, and it is administered.
Method of applying plaster to joints and separated bones from their locations, and also for pain caused by cracks and fractures: Take woolen thread and dip it in vinegar and oil, then pause it over the area.
It is not useful for this treatment, or to relieve pain caused by swelling or injury.
Another method of applying plaster that restores a broken bone: Take sheets of fig tree and sheets of poppy, cut them into pieces, and mix them together to make an ointment.
Method of applying a newly invented plaster that also treats swelling causing injury: Take roots of almond, of chamomile, and violets, ground together with flour of erba, and all of it in equal parts. All of them are made in a thin layer and stretched out, if the limb is not hurt.
If it is hurt, then prepare it with water of coriander that is slightly warm or with water and use it.
Another way of applying plaster that is stronger and treats swelling: Take roots of almond, of licorice, of borage, marjoram, violets, chamomile, and all of them in equal parts; they are made into a thin layer and stretched out according to the size of the limb and its rest on the skin.
You should not use it in the form of a roll that is paused over the broken limb to restore it, but rather only with wax and oil, and do not pause it for any other reason; and remember that it is between thickness and thinness.
You should know that the applying of resin to the broken limb is a method of restoring it, and you can use myrrh, honey, and those resembling those causes we have mentioned:
A method of applying plaster to an injury and pain: Take ground walnut, caraway, and the hair of a man or bird, and the roots of almond, and salt, all mixed together; they are made into a thin layer and stretched out; then apply it.
You should determine the amount according to how much the limb is painful and whether it is injured or not; if so, do not dislodge the plaster for a few days. And if there is severe pain or swelling at the site, then you should remove it that hour, and then apply the plaster to it.
Then take cloth of linen and sea sponge that is wet, dip it in vinegar and oil, and then pause it over the site until the swelling and pain subside; and then continue to apply plaster to it for a while, and then let it rest for an hour; and then place woolen thread dipped in vinegar and oil over it again, and then pour olive oil onto it. Continue applying plaster to it according to your knowledge of swelling causing injury, and it will relieve the pain of that area.
And now repeat that subtle constriction and thin paste and don't tighten it much for your first contraction, and now with that which is within be healed.
And if the puss and pain and swelling and all those accidents are already gone away completely, and you no longer need paste or constriction, then repeat that massage as you have done with the patient lying down.
And if none of those causes happen to the member that we have said, then do not wait more than three days or four or five or six or seven; And some people leave it for twenty days according to what you see with your own eyes about the loosening of the member, as I have said, until the fracture heals, and place the meat over that.
And then adjust the constriction more than in your first contraction, and adjust the thickness of the food of the patient, according to what is followed by his memory.
More if you see that the place of the fracture is completely dried and exhausted more than what covers it, then know that nutrition cannot reach it; and therefore wrap it in oily water for all to see that you are healing it a little; and let it be healthy after three days; and adjust the constriction slightly, and do this operation for the member so that it receives nutrition and is healed a little.
More if it happens that the restoration of the fracture of the member is not restored at the beginning, according to what it covers, and is restored according to its tortuosity, it is an error according to the operation of them, and great fear, and if it were to be dried out there would grow larger the Old ones in their free places and spread out with water.
And I have not seen this happen to anyone, so it is reasonable that it does not happen.
Capitol According: Of the fracture when it happens on top of the head.
The species of fractures are small, and the figures of them are diverse, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by hitting with a stone, and the hit stops all the bone inside the skull, which is left without it, so that if this type of fracture happens in the fust, and because of this special case is called ascial; or the stone cuts some part of the bone, and cuts the meat of it and does not pass the cut within the last of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levitation.
And the plague of these two types of fractures is great or small, and of the fracture that is contraction or contraction; and its cause is hitting with a stone or falling on the ground, and their similarity.
And this fracture is penetrating that it brings the skin near to the bone, which is left without it; or it is on the face of the bone, and the plague of these two types of fractures is great or small.
And of the fracture is that it is absorbed in the bone, in the subtility of small hair, and because of this special fracture is called the Capillary fracture.
And it is a fracture that happens or because of hitting with the ground or because of hitting with a stone, and its similarity, which makes some layer of the bone enter inside the parts, and it is made in the concave place as if you happen to the bones when they hit each other, and it is broken into pieces by their entrance into the inner parts.
And more often it happens in human bodies, as if it were the heads of infants.
And so these various types of fractures happen, and they are difficult tasks to heal as if they were separate. And I come back with the memory of all this in my place.
I have learned all these various types of fractures through detection on those and through inquiry about them, and from the corruption of flesh that is on them.
And the Capillary specialty is recognized by the blood that appears on the bone, and it is removed, and placed above it because the fracture appears black.
More at the beginning of the treatment of fractures, take into account the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by manifest sign that it means pain, as if vomiting with cholera, and exhaustion, and loss of mind, and absence of thought, and fainting, and high fever, and cold sweat of them, and similarity to their symptoms in the major cases, it is not healed.
And if you do not see those non-curable accidents, then begin the patient's treatment.
The cause is that if it has come to you the plague at the beginning when it is plagued, and it is in the winter days, then know that you study the healing of the bone before day twelve according to all disposition.
And if it is in the summer days, then know that you heal the bone before day seven, without letting the skin be left without the bone, and that the accidents happen which we have said.
And if the fracture has already reached the skin that covers the neck, and it is broken into small pieces and broken, then know that you cut the broken piece according to what I have said to you.
And that you cut the head of the patient who is plagued, and discover on the bone according to custom and in the way that you can as if the plague is on the neck, and it is light on the patient.
And if you happen to the patient, pause the detection of the bone, and apply cold water or ice, and let rest the pain in such a way that it is calmed down the puss, and be sure that the flow of the sanc; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in the removal of it.
That is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you cut the bone with a sharp knife in a straight line, and this is how it is done: And then apply another sharp knife to this, a little less than that; and this is how it is done:
And then apply more of the knife that is wider than the second.
And then know the names of different knives, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are sharper than others, and they are in the edge of their sharpness, and they are made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in hitting the knife so that it does not make a sound when striking the bone, and do not hit that.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you pierce in the circulation of it before you administer the knives to it, using the thin knives.
And these are not named in this way because they do not stop the end of the bone at the tip, as if it were a sharp edge or a small circle on the bone that is left without its top, similar to an edge or a small circle, which prevents submerging and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these thin knives according to what each bone needs, within what is presented in all the bones of the neck, the end of which is sharp, the length and brevity are according to the amount of thickness of this neck.
And this is the form of three types of knives: The quality of piercing in the circulation of the broken bone is that you pause the knife on the bone and turn it with the handles, and then put it in another place, and pause it where there is a hole through all the thickness of the ray or wrap it around.
And then insert the incision tool between each notch of the bone and make that little pus that you can put on it in the end to levitate, as we have said, until you root out the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool by which you will equip yourself for water, as well as with tweezers and delicate forceps.
And be careful that the incision instrument does not touch any cause of the patient's back.
And then when you have pierced the bone, separate it from the patient if it continues, and extract it, because you will take it out with sharp tools that are similar to incision instruments, but more rather because it is a little pus and a little subtle than other incision instruments.
And if there is any small bone left and it is dry, then take it off with ease by using water; and then cure the wound with lime and wipe off the blood that we have said.
And the other way of doing it is to cut it off, far from pain, which is what Gualia and the saw do by means of a loud noise; and this is how it sounds: It is necessary for you in the beginning that you start to uncover the bone's joint where there is a violent and obvious fracture, until when you have uncovered that joint and have paused it from both sides with this slow and pleasant incision tool whose form is:
And it is that the joint is round and does not insert into any cause, and the joint is acute and has two lengths in length, as well as often; that the joint is adjusted to the back with the side of the incision that is sharp on the bone.
And then hit hard on the incision tool of one joint with a little mallet so that you cut all the bone easily, thus avoiding any accident that you fear in any way, and if the medicine is pus from all people and more ignorant of their nature; certainly, and if it was sleeping.
And then if there is any cause attached to the bone of the skin in some places of bones, incise that with the side of the incision tool that is round, and free it easily, because it is freed from him without causing pain or danger.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the skin, and what is separated from the bone is its surface, and it is dry and thin, then cut off that surface and remove those thins with sharp tools that you have prepared in different quantities so that you can administer them in all places where pus is convenient for them and the right amount of them according to the bone on which you operate; this os broken and its shape.
And when you administer the right amount of those sharp tools at the beginning with which you cut the bone in length, and then use the least subtle of them, and do not stop doing that until you reach the place where you can administer the same pus to all of them.
But in any other small fractures or thin fractures, administer care according to the bone on which you operate.
And that is why it is not learned by all who have studied it in that work. So write to us if you have shown us in great fractures.
And if the skin is rectangular when you remove the bone, then take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rosin oil, and put that over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth that is folded or tripled, and submerge it in vinegar and rosin oil, and put that over the first cloth and make the incision little by little as much as you can on it, so that it does not hurt the ciphac; and then administer a little lacing thread, and do not tighten it except for the quantity of the wound only.
And leave that with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the pus; and then take off that one and then administer medicines with which it is unnecessary to dry up, such as rye flour and wheat flour, and spice powder, and similar things to those.
And that is because you have to make a powder of these medicines so that it is powdered over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer all medicine whose property is that it sucks and does not bite.
And keep according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clear; and is not in the surdicia of ointment or any other; nor do you leave adding virulence to it; because when it is put together on the skin of the patient, it corrupts that one and does not benefit that one, and causes harm to him.
And happens in the patient's head, and when it is taken out the bone and more importantly when its cure is spoken, and it is darker on its surface; and then consider now if it happens to the malice the accidents that we have said, you will know that it is dangerous for all.
And if it does not happen to be dark because of the medicine that is put on top of it, and if that medicine makes that dark, then take a part of honey and a part of rose oil made into a paste. iii. and put a cloth on those lines and put that over the ciphac; and then cure it with the spices of cure in which it is convenient to be healed.
Chapter. iii.
Of restoring the nose when it is broken.
You will know that it is not broken by the nose but two parts of pus are separate, or one of those little bones seen, because there are two bones in it, because the split between them is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, and does not happen to it except for a bit and twist and lack of smooth.
And if one of the two parts of it is broken, then take a small knife into the patient' nose and put that fracture within the little bone, and on the outside pus, so that the nose returns to its natural shape. Let it be done by you with ease, and keep for your own operation on the patient' head.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose where it has a small thickness, then make it even at the end of the bone in which it is broken.
And if there are two fractures, then you make the shape of it similar to that.
And rest for the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and then, if not, then prepare to take a little rest by doing this.
And then introduce a cloth in the end of the nose with a small amount of medicine, if the fracture is in one part, or two little amounts, if the fracture is in two parts, and make it as thick as much as it fills the nose' notch.
And say some of the little restorer things that the calguas are wrapped in a cloth, and they are changed every day, but I do not see it; until you leave the cloth wrapped in egg white with powder; and then leave that one there while the bone is held and the cartilage hardens.
And some little bones in the nose are wrapped together, instead of one, otherwise the nose will be wrapped with a cloth that is very thick; and it is that you have broken the patient' nose because it has caused pain to him so that he cannot breathe properly.
And this reason is not necessary for you; and if you want, do one, and if you want, do two.
And if it happens that another wound is infected, apply a plaster of honey with charred herbs and olive oil and rosemary, or diaquilone.
But if another wound is not infected, then apply that on the outside with flour of sago and powder of ensets mixed with egg white; and place it over the stump, and do not put the nose there for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then cut them off and remove them with a suitable instrument; and sew up the opening and treat it with water that hardens and heals it and with plasters that suit it.
And if there is a plague inside the nose, then you should treat that with calamine and lead pipes placed inside so that it may be completely cured.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not deep, and it does not seem to be dislocated and bent on either side, then its recovery is easy.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you shall introduce the little finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth; and, if the fracture is on the left side, then introduce the little finger of the right hand; and easily push the fracture back in place with your thumb, and gently set the bone in position with your other hand, moving it slightly from side to side. And do this carefully.
And if the jaw fracture has separated into two pieces, then you should administer extension of two parts according to its shape so that you can restore its equilibrium.
And if there is a concussion of the teeth and a disruption, then strengthen those which you hope will hold fast with gold, silver, or cedar; and place them over the broken jaw with wax, and place them over a double drape, and place a star-shaped drape over it gently made, or a single loop to the length of the jaw; and bind it in place according to its shape, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and keep calm, and give them sips of warm liquid.
And if you suspect that its shape has been altered in any way, then you shall fast for three days; and afterwards, correct what is wrong with it and apply plaster to it with flour of poppy, egg white, or sago, so that you have not removed the wax, and place it over the plaster.
And then, when it is well-attached and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone, so that it may heal completely and strengthen the fracture; for if you remove it again, this fracture will take three weeks to heal.
And if another wound is infected again, then administer the water that we have mentioned to you for the prevention of infections until it is healed, and do not remove the poultice.
And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is separated into two pieces or has become loose; and you shall gently move those pieces with water that suits them for their removal from the instruments.
And if the wound of the infection is small, then you shall increase the bleeding according to your need.
And when you have removed those loose pieces, then sew up the wound if it is wide; and otherwise, place a plaster on it so that it may heal.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the fork (forchetta) when it is dislocated.
The fork (forchetta) may be broken in three ways.
Or it may be dislocated, or separated, or separated into two pieces that do not cause loose ends; but its recovery is easy; or it may be broken in such a way as to cause loose ends, and its recovery is difficult; or it may be infected.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is infected, is that you should have ready two ministers, one of whom shall keep the fork fixed and the other shall extend the neck towards the part where it is broken;
And then bind the fracture with twine according to its shape so that it is not made into a lump or hollow; and do not place it in a small prominence or cavity.
And if you are worried about the extension of the back, then stop it with a drape or woollen cloth, and make it as large as your need requires; and extend and raise the fork and bind the neck according to its shape so that you do not tie it too tightly.
And if you cannot reach the end of the fork to the outside, as it comes out through the neck, then the patient should be laid on his back, and a small cushion placed under him; and place a hand over the muscle so that it does not move.
And the minister should press the back of the patient so that the bone of the fork is raised where it comes out through the neck; and then you shall correct the fracture and bind it with twine.
But if you feel loose ends of the fork and they are bothering you, then cut them off with a sharp knife.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you shall use one of your instruments that you have placed under it, for you have removed the fork from the instrument with which you were using it; and this instrument can be made of wood or iron, of which this shape is made.
And it seems like a cup in which this shape is the cavity; and its width should be according to the water that you require for it, and its size according to the size of the bone or the length of the neck.
But the length of it should be according to what you can manage in the operation; that there be two ends, one broad and the other narrow.
And if the infection that you have cut off from the bone is wide, and you are sure that there will be no wound, then you shall sew up the two lips of the wound with a thread.
And if the disruption is small, or you are afraid of an infection, then you shall use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound.
And if there is an infection again, then apply honey with vinegar and olive oil and rose water, and place it over the wound.
And altogether, that the stork does not break the broken bone; and therefore, each day, when the plaster is softening or the stork has been removed, then you shall correct what is wrong and tighten the ligature.
And then place the patient's sleep on his neck, and put a pillow under them, so that he does not lie flat on his back, because it raises the helpers of him from the ground, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is raised to the elevation of the muscle; or, that is, his arms are tied to his neck.
And do not remove the ligature if it does not occur immediately in the place, unless after 12 days.
And renew the plaster if you see his face in water, and tighten it and restore it, until he is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comfortable according to the month in 28 days, and some healed in certain times of that.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The spatula pie is broken in its place, and it is not broken on him, but only the edges.
And when it is broken its place - and it is broken in his middle place - and it is not known except by touching, then according to that figure of the fracture dislocates you prepare him and reduce that according to the natural figure in all ways to invent the which is at your possible.
And then put on his place powder of meal with white of egg and rub it; and then put a cloth double; and then put on him a table knife according to the quantity of the spatula whole or a little less.
More if you leave the stela is a concave place in some of the places of the spatula, then you fill that concave place with white of egg, and then put on him a table according to equality.
And then strengthen it above with a long thread from the constriction of the skin and the tightening of the table until it is not moved out of its place.
And consider the ligature every day; and all that it is softened, renew it and tighten the table if it is moved out of its place.
And hit the patient on his back with a staff.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligature, and that you know assured because that is of the bones from which the beginning was not torn and its dissolution.
And if you treat the place of the bone pain and leave the knot, then cut it on him, and heal according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sudden pain of poultice if it occurs here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of a foot fracture.
The foot, some healed is broken in the middle place of him and he is broken inside it; but the extremities of him move that they are not ciccatices and comminuted.
And from the accidents of him when it is broken its middle part is that it declines to the inside parts and occurs to him great pain, and difficulty in walking, and hoarseness, and weakness, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in his cavity in the broken bone and it is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of him is that he be raised up the patient on his two feet, and place a cushion between his shoulders; and press the muscles of him, and adjust the ribs of him to the sides of the two ribs, and carefully in the operation of him and in the equation according to all ways that it is possible and convenient to water, until return the figure of the bone according to what we have said.
And then put on him the plaster and the wool and place a table cloth in levitation, because you wrap that in a cloth; and then carefully tie that on the broken bone that it is not moved out; and go to the ligature according to its roundness on the back of some healed, and tighten that well; and then consider the ligature every hour, and when it is softened, tighten that.
And if necessity provokes to dislodge that, because of corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or poultice which it occurs in the place, then you cut off and free that, and remove the plaster and correct him what it happens through water according to a way of cure for him; and then reduce the plaster, if it is necessary to wet his face; and adjust the tightening until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of ribs happens only in large places which go to the two sides; and from the extremities of them from the place of departure do not happen to those contusions because they are cartilage. And the feeling of him is not hidden from feeling, because it seeks his knowledge according to what we have said.
And the restoration be as such that it joins the fracture according to a possible way, until it is swallowed according to what we have said; and then put on him the plaster and tighten the bone broken with a table, if you feel pain from him.
And if the fracture of ribs is declining to the inside parts, then occurs to him great pain and stinging, so that it happens to him that he has wept, because the bone is covered with a veil; and occurs to him difficulty in walking, and hoarseness, and vomiting from a sudden motion; and this is difficult for cure.
And the ancient people are prepared already to heal those with a medicine that has healing properties.
And of them so say: Cover the patient to heal his wounds that cause inflammation and ventilation, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the outside parts.
And we will cool him water because it is not a cause of inflammation to generate poultice if it occurs; and if it has already occurred, then it helps already to water.
And some of them say that it is necessary to cool him well and to put on him clothes that do not heat up; and it seems similar to a reasoning, but it is more feared that the ventilation will throw the superfluities to the place because of his weakness.
And some of them say: Cover the place with a wool that is already submerged in oil for it, and make between the ribs to be filled, because the ligature encloses that according to its roundness; and then he is cured the patient with a cure of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
And if it is a violent constriction on the patient that he does not suffer, and the bone puts a veil on it with stinging pain, they are afraid of the patient, then cover him because it breaks in the place, uncover that one part which keeps the seal, because we do not remember its description, and we write the bone with ease, and extract it.
And then we will tighten the two lips of the wound if it is large with a poultice, and heal that with plaster until it is healed.
And if there is an apoplexy inside him, then you cut off and put in oil, and place on it a poultice to cure the patient from that apoplexy inside him.
And he is raised up on his back until it is healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the spine of the two and the neck.
Some healed the bones of the neck, and it is broken into its place, and similar to those of the spine of the two. And when it happens to some of them and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider because, if the times they are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot move those bones, and when they feel pain in those parts, then you know that it does not heal, and in the time of disposition is mortal.
And if they stand or sit there with those constraints and the doctor pricks them, then know that the back of the neck is safe and that the patient will be healed through treatment.
And if you see the spine of the neck immersed in water and want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the feet.
And if you think they are already softened, approach those waters that happen to the feet, and when you step on them, there is wind and diarrhea as their will, and some pee standing up and can't, then know that it is fatal, and then do not work on their treatment.
But if none of those causes happen, the cause is better and more easily treated.
And the treatment of the patient is that you pierce into the spine's back or side, or apply hot stones to it; place it over the spine or side, and some people say that piercing into one of their feet causes a sedative effect that stops the spine's pain.
Then place one of the comforting compresses that exist, and tighten it over that part with thread; and order the patient to use rest and tranquility and not sleep on the bed where they get pain, so that it is healed.
And if the fracture of the bone is severe or there is some cause that has already separated it from the body, then cut off what is attached to the spine and tighten it with a string, and adjust the two lips of the wound, suturing them if they are large; and heal those with encrustations, so that it is healed.
But if the back of the leg is broken, and it is the end of the fracture, then cut off what is attached to the spine and tighten it with a string, and adjust the two lips of the wound, suturing them as best you can according to the situation; and place a compress over it and wrap it up, if you feel like doing so, and tighten that.
And if you feel severe pain in the foot, then cut off what is attached to it and tighten it with a string, and heal the wound with treatment that precedes it, so that it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of Restoring the Ankle.
The bones of the ankle are often broken, and if they are broken, their fracture is not but a common communication between its extremities and is spread along its length and declines at the joints; and pain and pricking occur in the place where it is fractured, and the chest is stunned when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of the patient is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is only at the end of the foot, then you should extend your hand over it so that it is in line with its natural figure, according to what you can do with ease.
But if the fracture is long or has already declined at the joints, then you should prepare the patient's abdomen for your treatment of that fracture. And when you have healed that foot, place a compress over it, and tighten with a string that does not cause pain or movement of the stilha.
And fill the concave shape with water that fills that foot within equality, and order the patient to sleep on their side or open their body.
But if an apoplexy happens, then you should stop your treatment of the patient until it is sedated, and place a compress over that water according to what comes before; and then return to restoring the foot, and tighten it with thread and wax.
And if the bone is fractured or broken into pieces, you should put them back together.
Chapter 11.
Of Restoring the Fracture of the Ankle-bone.
The aduttore is that which is between the armpit and the top of the shoulder.
If it is broken, the restoration of the patient is done in one of two ways, and the first is that you take a piece of wood and sharpen it with a sharpener; then, place a compress over the break, and wrap it up tightly with a string.
And tie the two ends together tightly, so that they are suspended from an elevated place.
And let the patient sit on a stool; and then cut out the broken part of the arm with a knife, so that it reaches the tip of the hand where it is attached to the arm's curvature.
And suspend over that difficult cause, or the medicine extends to the ends of the foot; and then the doctor treats the fracture along with the patient's other illnesses, so that the fracture returns according to what it can do.
The other way is that the patient is raised up on their neck, and their hand is suspended from the collar with thread; and order two servants that one hold water to open the fracture with its hands, and the other holds the feet apart.
And if you want to make the expansion stronger, then you should tighten with thread on the fracture and on the foot with another thread, and order each of the two servants to stretch one end.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cut off what is attached to the bone halfway, and the other half covers the break where it should be.
And if the fracture is almost at the end of the muscle, then cut off what is attached to the bone above that point and place it over the break.
Eat the foot with ease and work on it, and when you have healed it according to what is needed, then tighten it if an apoplexy does not happen.
But if an apoplexy happens, then release the stricture after seven days, and place a compress of sour milk and wine on it to stop the apoplexy, and then tighten it.
The way to tighten that foot is that you place a compress over the fracture, and then wrap it up tightly with a cloth; and then adjust the arms above the aduttore, and place their hands on the muscles.
And then remove the cloth and tighten the arms above the aduttore, so that the arm is in place of the stilha, unless you prevent it from happening due to a bone fracture.
Then use stilhs.
And that is because you place the stilys over the fracture that they are placed farther apart and closer together than the rest of the stilys, adding three fingers to the entire length of the stilys according to the fracture.
And then tighten the stilys with the same string that was used at the beginning of this chapter.
And your tightening on the spot of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is healed, the string should be looser.
And if you change the position of the stilys and the tightening according to what I said in the hour when you restore the member to its place, then do so.
And if you fear an apoplexy, then release the string and the stilys after seven days according to what I said before.
And then consider the members in three different ways for seven days so that it does not cause pruritus or swelling in the place; or if the food reaches the member through a path of superfluity of the string; and then correct everything according to what I said before.
But if you are sure that none of those causes will happen, then do not remove the ligature until three or more days have passed.
And so be his sleep of the patient on his back, and his arms are on his sides, over his stomach.
And pause over the assistant surgeon who is full of wool, and consider throughout the night or day that the shape of the injured member does not distort or dissolve, so correct it completely with your virtue.
And pause the food of the patient according to the order that we have mentioned above, until the food is refined in its beginning so that it hardens when it is cooked; and when it has thickened, cover it.
It is the custom of the assistant surgeon and the mattress of the patient that they are made strong in ten days; and then, when they have hardened, they are separated and washed and given medicine with which those who treat them correct it.
And if the fracture is stiff and broken, then you do not separate that limb and the bones from each other within one or two months.
Chapter XII.
On the Restoration of a Broken Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called two forks; one is small, and is that which has broken the push, and the other is large and is that which is left behind the small said, from the starting point behind.
And a strong break has been made in the larger fork alone, or in the small one, and a strong lock has been made together.
And when the small fork is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and its cure is faster.
And when the small fork is broken below, then the fracture is bad and the cure of it is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
So if the bone that is broken is the small fork above, then it is appropriate for the doctor, considering the restoration of it, to make a small incision with ease as soon as it is covered.
But if the large fork is that which is broken, then consider making an incision more violently.
And if both forks are broken together, then consider making the incision with a stronger tool.
And since you have placed the shape of the hand and extended it on a cushion, and the palm of the hand is towards the starting point above, more than all the others say, and the auricular (knuckle) is lower than all the others say, and the patient's foot is touching a raised mat.
Is a cushion in front of him in height or upright position, so that the patient does not tire himself out.
Then the minister extends the arm from the starting point behind with his hand or limb, and another minister extends over it.
Then the doctor covers the bone with wool before he sews it according to the best shape that can be made.
And if in the fracture of the bone is slow, then you pierce through it with your virtue all at once.
And if it appears in slow separation that the bone is sticking out and is not to your expectation in its restoration, then you bend over it and adjust it according to the way we have mentioned above.
But if the fracture is severe, I have already written a unique chapter on it, and therefore take the cure of it.
And if a fever occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you wash with a cold cloth made of wool and white wax, and make it thin between clarity and subtlety, and tighten the cloth tightly over that fracture until the fever subsides; and then remove the cloth and put on plaster prepared from flour of poplar, and place the stirrups; and let the one which is placed be above that fracture further to the left and stronger.
You know that the number of stirrups for the arm is in major proportion, or that the fracture is in one fork or in two together.
Then you place your stricture on the location of the fracture further and stronger, and faster and more violent, and when it is less strict at the starting point of the fracture or further down than the starting point, then you make it less strict a little bit according to that recollection at the beginning of the chapter.
And the clothes that are wrapped around the fracture are soft and damp cloths, not hard or sharp, and the true one is made strong by itself according to what has been mentioned above.
Consider the member with the wrap for ten days. And if there occurs any cause of which correction is necessary, and you feel it acutely in the member, then consider that you inject the member with cold water until the acuteness subsides.
And do not constrict the member until it rests, and then return to the stricture.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bone has completely healed with appearances like those before him, then you correct it all at once with your virtue.
And consider also if the nutrition of the member is prohibited by excess stricture, for it is appropriate that you soften it a little and leave it alone for several days so that it runs to the nutrition, and then strengthen it.
But if there is no cause of those that we have mentioned, then consider that it should not be unwrapped within a period of approximately twenty days or more around that time.
Then hang the hand of the patient by its virtue of moving it, and make him sleep on his back.
You know that this fracture has been restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or a strong break has been restored in twenty-eight days, and all of it is according to the dispositions of the complex and the dispositions of virtue.
Chapter XIII.
On the Restoration of a Broken Wrist and of the Fingers.
You know that to the wrist and to the fingers with ten digits there is a fracture of the same type as a finger, and do not occur to them on the right or left side.
And if there occurs to the patient's hand a fracture or a break of the same type, then consider that he walks with his head forward and not back, and when he extends it, place the hand in front of him.
Then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor covers them with good wound, making a smooth shape.
Then consider that you put on plaster and cotton, not causing a fever; and then place the stirrups above the quantity of the location, and you have wrapped it in a cloth.
But if the lock is in the inner part of the hand, then make a shape like a cloth, and order the patient to tighten his locked hand with long cloth; then it should be bound with a long cloth.
And let the stirrup of wood be placed on the cloth so that it is lifted up, in order that the wood applies to the palm; and tighten it according to that which has been said.
But if the fracture is in the outer part, then consider that you place above it two stirrups of wood on the palm, so that the hand remains open and not closed; and then return to the stricture, as when the hand is turned between the fingers with a cloth.
And if there occurs a fracture to one of the fingers, then consider that it is the little finger, and make it engaged according to what has been said; and then tighten it with a small cloth, turning the hand so that the fracture does not hurt.
But if the fracture occurs to one of the other fingers, whether to that which is in the middle, or at the index, or at the auricular, or at the ring finger, then consider that it be engaged according to what has been said by this index; or all are engaged together according to continuity, and this is better; or place over a small stirrup, as when we have mentioned above in the little finger.
And consider in your recovery and those the disposition of the pustules to the opposite -- for this is his proper operation -- that when some of these causes occur according to what is recounted in him.
Chapter XIV.
On the Restoration of a Broken Bone of the Thigh.
The thigh bone has two ends which are broken and revealed, and it is reduced to the proper position according as the head comes forward and the pustule rises.
And the restoration of him is done in such a way that the ligament is reinforced over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and on his face.
Then the minister extends all the ligament according to the quality, when the fracture is in its middle part of the bone.
But if it has happened to the root of the thigh, then the ligament is extended from below to the middle part of the leg, in order that the extension may catch in its place, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.
And if the break has happened to the root, then the ligament is made from below to the middle part, and the extension is made at its ends.
And the doctor makes the bone join together by good jointure according to its natural appearance, and the bone is united; then cover with plaster and tighten it, if it does not ache in the limb; and that will be sufficient. But if it happens to the apostema, then you shall leave it for several days until the pustule is dried up, and then return to your treatment.
The tightening of him is done in such a way: that a hard bandage be wrapped around the fracture, and that it be doubled two or three times, and that the superfluity be removed; and then wrap up the leg so that it enters into the stocking and into the root of the thigh.
And insert a long piece of cloth between the leg and the bandage from the root to the ends on both sides, and bring the two ends of the piece of cloth over the bandage and the leg so that what is superfluous be removed from the bandage; and then return it to the bandage and the leg.
And place over the thigh in the place of the broken bone a wooden staff, and place another one on the leg.
And fill up the spaces between the bandage and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the tightening be firm.
And begin the good strong tightening of him on the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and how much more you leave the ligament in the place of the fracture, your tightening will be less strong and lighter and moister.
And extend two ends of the cloth to the ends on both sides until it enters into the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the wooden staff of the other side that the ligament may not be moved from its place.
And leave the tightening on it, since this is not likely to cause any injury of corrosion, pustule or swelling there; and if any cause of these happens, then try to remove it gradually, and correct what has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said.
But if the bone is thicker than that on which it was placed, then cover it as much as possible; and if not, remove it and heal him with water in which the healing has happened before, until he be cured.
Some of these fractures of the thigh are strengthened by the ligaments being adjusted to them, as we have said in the assistant and in the arms.
But nevertheless in the restoration of him is done in such a way that it does not cause any clumsiness in the patient; and if he is restored alone, another water is applied to which the other leg is applied, so that he may be clumsier there.
You know that the thigh is strengthened in ten days or a few more or fewer, and all this depends on the diversity of conditions and the other arrangements.
Chapter XV.
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Ankle Bone.
You know that the fracture of the ankle is healed sooner, but if it happens to be at the back, then...
But if it happens to the fracture, then there is only a crack or a split in the ends, and that is either dry or wet, and all this is according to what we have said.
And the restoration of him is done in such a way that he is extended from his ends, as much as possible, and that it is united and joined according to what is easy and convenient and possible.
And place a round wooden staff on the ankle, if you are in need of it; and tighten it with a good tightening to the water.
And consider all the arrangements which we have recommended for other fractures, as well as the possibility of a pustule being formed and similar things; and if any accident happens to him, try it gradually with water which is convenient to him until he be healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones which one is large and is called the femur, and the other is small and is called the tibia; and between them runs a joint which is called the knee.
It happens to all kinds of fractures of the leg as it does to the two bones of the arm, and the operation for the one is like that for the other; and the dismemberment is also similar.
But if both bones are broken together, then the leg is dislocated completely.
And if the smaller bone is broken, then the leg is dislocated in front.
And if the larger bone is broken, it comes forward, and these are causes which are not suitable to you.
And administer with a good stretching of the ends according to that gualing.
But if the fracture of the leg is not serious, having no swollen places, then the stretching should be light and gentle, and it will be a blessing to you.
In the leg there is a need for an operation on the arm, and it is when you join the ends and complete all the work; then take care of the bones with a sharp knife from the palm tree which is removed from the small ones, and do not cut the thick parts of the hands, and the length should be taken according to that of the leg, and from the root to the ends.
And wrap each cloth in two wrappings according to the length of it, and place one over the root of the leg from one side, and the other over it from the other side, and they are placed from the root to the ends of the foot.
And bind the two ends of the two sticks in three places, two on each side and one at the middle; for with this stretching the leg does not clatter to the right or to the left, and it is in a good position.
And an armful of palm wood has already been administered according to the length of the leg; and let it rest in him that he may retain its movement.
Much more should you use water when you are healing a fracture, and when it is healed properly.
And consider every day the leg and study it well, and you should guard it against any cause which is similar to a pustule; and if any of these causes happen, then try to remove it gradually with water so that he be healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot, and the dislocation.
To the talus bone, it does not happen a fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot it happens a fracture in some places; and to the hernia of the leg, it rarely happens a fracture, and not to them except in the lower part of the body.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and those bones are elevated above themselves, then place the patient on their feet prepared like this.
And approach one foot over that which is elevated from those bones, and approach those, and press, and fit them in their places.
Then place plaster and bandage over it, and place the patient's abdomen on a small table, where there are two heads of a plier.
Then tighten those with the foot stretched downward, because you have wrapped it in linen and other causes from which it is injured.
And after three or four days pass by, then remove the splint because you will think that the bones are fixed in place, or they are caught or displaced; and the operation on those is so with a pointed instrument.
But if any of them are caught, then restore those, and fit them in place with oil and remords to you in the restoration of those of the hand. And place the pin in such a way according to its length, and set it aside slightly; and place the foot on the table that you were advised, and tighten those with the foot stretched downward.
But if that which is caught of the bones are two or three or more, then you place the pin in such a way according to its length wrapped in linen, and tighten the table on the top base of the foot, and let it stand on one of the heads of the table through the abdomen so that it holds well.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you consider all the causes which have been said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and approach yourself to every accident when it comes.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the jawbone of the femur and the hipbone, and of the staff of the man.
When the jawbone is caught, then cut that in half with a saw; and approach it to the joint of the two a little inclined, and fit it.
And the midwife ties that in a crotch, and fits it in the jaw with a string; and approach that to the joint of the two a little inclined, because all that is caught inside is out front there; and the woman is dislocated, and lifts up the two legs little by little, because all that is caught inside returns.
And place dust on the two legs, and when she wants to urinate remove that with ease and approach it, and reduce it a little; and return it according to the way it was at first, and approach it again to the man.
And do so for seven days or more because that is restored.
And if you want to, take a bladder of olive oil and tighten it over the root of the leg with a pipe; and push all that bladder into the jaw, and approach it to blow into the pipe with power inside the jaw because the fracture returns.
And let that be filled with a crotch and be for several days according to what we have said, so that it is healed.
And when the hipbone of man or woman is caught, then administer in the restoration and puncturing of that which we have mentioned in the bones of the leg.
And that which is right does not hide these fractures of nearby bones and rarely happens, mostly to those on whom a study and use has been made and understood in this my book; because that fracture signifies to you in the main situations by right-handedness in the restoration and tightening of it, and so they understand well.
But in the staff of the man when it is caught, take a bandage of linen, and wrap that staff; and approach it to the wrapping, and let it be wrapped for three days or more, so that it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the Restoration of Fracture of Bones when it is wet.
It is convenient to you if the fracture happens by wetness, and mostly if the bone is big such as the bone of the leg or the joint, or similar to that, that you let it rest and flush it sometimes if the conditions of flushing are evident to you thus far have we said.
And if the blood flows, then you let it rest and flush it sometimes if you sprinkle on it dry earth triturated, unless another cause is presented to you.
And begin the restoration of that fracture in a single day, and do not prolong it, unless an apoplexy happens.
But if an apoplexy happens carefully, then you let it rest for nine days, so that the apoplexy subsides, and do not approach it on the third day and the ninth of all, because you will cause a bad accident.
But if the broken bone is imminent on the joint discovered, then you let it be reduced and fit it in with your own hands with ease and a little extension.
But if the extension is not prepared for you and your own hands, then you reduce that bone with your own hands according to its length, which is seven or eight days; and a long time, which is two days, according to the quantity of blood; and it is necessary that the doctor take from those three or four, depending on the amount that you require for the cure in all kinds of fractures.
And be gentle, and be in it a little gentleness that it is not bent twice the compression on it at the hour of the operation.
And be in sharpness on the part which is cut, and be the dust of the leg with a thin thread, and of the bulk of it within the joints.
This is the form of it:
It is called in Greek "labra volentz atelarem", which means gentle and long-suffering.
That the end of it be raised, so that it is higher than the end of the bone that is imminent.
And place that in a bowl within which returns the bone, and fit it with a certain equation.
And then strive to fit the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end that is caught is fine, and you do not pick up the instrument because it has the power to break; but if you cannot pick it up, then take another instrument with which you have the power to cut.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with water that we have mentioned, then cut it with water that we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in some way so that it is possible for you to do.
And approach it quickly to the bone of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone has been reduced, and the patient's pain is great and burning, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and then do what you wish to the man because you confer great benefit.
And when your restoration is complete which you make to the bone, and then place a linen bandage of black color, especially if it is in summer, and do not approach it on the apoplexy or any other cause by which it might happen a bad outcome or corruption.
And then administer stars at the time of the third step of bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered until you cut with scissors and wrap according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound with a fracture, for it can cause bad symptoms, and may cause death or corruption or putrefaction in them, so that they heal. And if the tightness is soft, unlike the tightness of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad plague, and you fear that those accidents may happen again, and you feel pain in that place, do not cover it with stars, but wrap it with hard wraps instead of stars, and tighten it well.
And when the wound begins to hurt again after one or two days, let it dry, then remove the wrap you had placed on it, and apply heat to that place, according to our custom, which is that we treat plagues with heat, thus applying a four-fold mixture and poultice.
And you should remove the splint and consider the wound every day from morning until evening before it is consolidated and closed, and cover the member in such a way that the corrosion runs away from it to the parts.
If the wound takes more than a few days to heal and is not closed or the bracelet is broken, then you will know that this is a sign of trouble, so be careful. And of those injuries that separate themselves and extrude, those that are not separated and place the member in such a way that they cause pain, pierce yourself to cut them out according to what is possible.
And if the wound is infected with pus or putrefaction, then it is a sign of bad omen, so cover yourself to prevent such things from happening again as those that are mentioned in his chapter.
And from this place, where you should put your hand on yourself: when it is swollen, apply heat to the member as well as the bones of the thigh and support, and do not be afraid of the removal, for a strong force can break it after about twenty days or so; leave it inside that it may heal. Then heal the wound if it is visible, and if not, leave it.
Chapter 20.
Of the treatment of a broken bone that occurs at the site of a fracture.
This treatment occurs at the site of healing a fracture, mostly when it is near the joints, and it disturbs the member's natural operation.
Then consider if the injury is recent and apply those medicines that have been described above, as well as washing, and see, and search for, and smell, and touch, and wrap them in a cloth, and tighten them with good restraint.
Then leave that wrapping in place for a few days; then remove it and apply another one, unless the wound has been inflamed again; or tighten it with a lead plate because lead has the property of keeping all the swelling out of the limbs.
But if the injury has already become severe and is hardened, it provokes a violent stabbing, then cut it with a sharp knife from its upper most part, and cut off the excess and prominent part, or break it by applying a strong force to it within, so that it heals wherever it can; then heal it.
Chapter 21.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored, and then return that member to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is healed, and then return that member to its delicate state, unless it is due to a variety of causes: one is the diversity of solutions for the splint and the connection of it to the body does not match; or because of excess tightness in the splints through which nutrients are prevented from reaching the member; or because of a variety of unnecessary treatments; or because of excessive movement at inappropriate times; or because of a lack of rest for the body.
And the treatment of that is to feed the patient and make his heart happy because the pain multiplies in him; and apply baths, and give a gentle massage, and bring relief to him.
Then put a cloth on the member, so that the cloth provides nourishment to it, or continue with a shower of water, so that the nutriment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of broken bones when they are restored with torture, and prohibit the operation of them unless necessary.
When the member is already restored as a result of healing a broken bone and an injury that causes pain in the form of the member, but this member is not prevented from its natural operation, so you should accept the word that this member has been recently broken.
But many bad symptoms and healing methods have already occurred in our land, and this operation is very painful, causing great fear of the sign that brings death.
But if the claudication and injury are recent, then consider that they be wrapped in a warm water bath in which herbs with soothing properties are added, as well as leaves of mint and raisin, and honey, applied to it; or that it is coated with a paste made from a herbal infusion, or that it is rubbed with a liniment of gualine or olive oil extracted from chamomile, and wrapped in a cloth; or that it is dressed with dried fig leaves, and similar to those of the medicines that are called dry consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent light friction that is kept moist, and applied at all times.
But if the torture has already been done in advance, and it is severe and has become a pain that provokes the need for treatment with iron, then consider that the pus above be removed and the continuous bone be dissolved, and insert into it those excesses of injury from that member by means of a very delicate scalpel, and administer ease to it wherever it is needed, and study carefully.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is when any of the joints of the member is displaced from its place, so that it is prevented from moving, and the figure of the member is changed, causing great pain and severe damage.
Then when a dislocation occurs, pierce it so that it is reduced quickly, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes fixed and very difficult to reduce.
And so, it is not necessary to stretch or tighten it at the time of reduction, because this causes spasms and pain.
Then when it happens to you, consider that you undergo an operation called flaubotomia on the member, and leave it to rest while it is reduced; then wrap the member in warm water and oil, and reduce it easily.
And the whole member be healed with that water, so that the memory of it will return to its place.
And I have ordered that the joints be moved according to what is described in the fracture; from the top of the body it comes into the bottom part.
Chapter .xxiiii.
About the treatment for dislocated jaw: leave it alone.
If the two jaws are not set back soon after being dislocated, or if they are slightly moved by a little handling and become softened a little; or if they are completely dislocated and fully moved apart, so that they do not close again, nor is there saliva in the mouth, and the tongue is wrapped up with the words.
But when the dislocation is small, then in the major part of the cases return by themselves for a small cause.
But if the dislocation is whole and complete, then cover that it may be administered with a little reduction, and not be delayed at all.
And the minister has the head of the patient, and inserts his hand into his throat at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from one side; or that he inserts both hands together, if the dislocation is from two sides, and the other parts of him are apart; and orders the patient to cease moving his jaws and to place them back in their places; and the doctor makes the jaw fit and closes it.
But if the reduction is difficult, and more so if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer a vapour of water and oil, so that the reduction of both be made a little and not be delayed at all in making the reduction of both, as I have said above.
And so, when they return and are closed up together, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then put a cloth on those parts, and make it with wax and oil rolled up; and then let it be held in place with ease by means of soft ligatures.
And let the patient lie on his back, and the head between two pillows, so that he does not spit out at right or left; and do not force him to swallow anything; have his own food, but when the pains return and the jaws are closed, then give him what he wants to drink.
And this water should be administered with ease, and not work on the mouth's opening while eating, drinking, and swallowing, so that the jaw is closed and healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are completely dislocated at any time, and do not return to their places, then very often fever and soda will happen, and a strong belching from the patient's belly, and a strong vomiting of pure cholera will occur.
And when you see water, then know that it is a waste; and very often the patient dies within ten days from the time he drank water.
Chapter.xxv.
About the reduction of the dislocation of the furchetta and the end of the muscle.
The furchetta is not dislocated from the body at its base because of the continuity with the foot; and some are dislocated from the outside part, and water is used to this end.
And the restoration is that the patient jumps on his back and spreads his legs. Then put the place on the palm of your hand with a strong grip, because it will return.
And then place over that plaster and dust, and tighten it up.
But the end of that muscle which seizes you is not dislocated in any day; then it is reduced and closed up as I have said, and according to your costume.
And then place over that plaster, and dust, and tighten up, and order the patient to stay quiet and at rest until it is healed.
And in this cure for the shoulder joint, the end of the muscle is separated from its place when reduced.
Chapter.xxvi.
About the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways; and one of them is dislocated at the top of the rib, at the top part.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the bottom part of the rib muscle, and this should not be done; nor is it dislocated from behind by the shoulder, nor from in front by the nerves.
And most often it is dislocated and comes out at the bottom part of the rib, and most often in those parts where the meat is small, it is slightly dislocated; but in those where there is a lot of meat, it comes out with difficulty.
And very often, in some people, there is a pounding or a shock; and the muscle of the patient is bruised with a bruise, and it is known that it has been dislocated by water that has already been dislocated.
Then you should wait until you are no longer wet from it, and then proceed with the treatment of the patient.
It is known that the dislocation of the patient is when he is at the bottom part of the rib; but so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, because there is a great difference between them; and it is known that the top of the rib is concav to the side, and the top of the rib is touched with the head in such a way that one can put his hand on it, and the patient cannot reduce it back into its place at his ear, nor can he move it at all.
If it is dislocated from the foot or from the leg, then you should feel a clear touch; and do not cover it up.
And of this dislocation there is a little reduction when it is fresh and the patient does not eat.
And the reduction of the patient is that the minister raises his hand up to the top part of it; then he puts the strings on each side of the rib of the patient, and tightens them with strength towards their place, and the minister raises the patient's hand up, and spreads it out; and then he puts those strings aside because they return slightly.
But if by water that I have said does not return, and only from the beginning of the dislocation; then the patient is bathed in cold water and given a massage to soften it and relax it, as if his joints were being moved by a warm oil; and fenugrec, and meletum in water, is administered.
And the patient should be raised on his back and be placed with his legs apart in such a way that the ends of the rib are suspended by themselves; and the doctor places his hand on the top part of the rib, and raises it towards its place, and the other minister holds the head so that it is not moved to the outside, because that returns quickly.
And if you want to, reduce it in this way: and it is known that you should have been present with a man who was longer than the patient, and stand on the same side of him; and insert his hand into the bottom part of the rib of the patient, and raise it up towards its place while the patient remains suspended in the air, and the other minister holds the patient' head so that it does not move to the outside, because that returns quickly. But if the patient is weak, then know that he may be suspended by himself because of another cause; for the dislocation returns quickly.
And if it is necessary to make incisions on the surface of the body, then do so with a sharp knife, not too thick or thin, and place them on the patient's thigh; because they are placed on top of the thigh, the leg should be positioned according to the length of the thigh, and the hand should be extended to the cuts on one side of the leg while the other side is held firm, for the joint returns to its position quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce the patient for any of the reasons mentioned above, then use this cure: and that you take a long pole whose length is two brazen staff, and whose width is four fingers, and whose thickness is lessened at the end that fits into the hole according to this shape:
And place the round end of the pole on top of the thigh, with lions' claws so that the pole does not slide off the thigh.
And place it on the patient's thigh below the knuckle, and extend the arm or hand above the pole where it is joined to the other part, and tie the pole firmly onto the assistant and arm and the end of the hand.
Then place the arm on a step according to its width, and extend the hand at one end, and suspend the other side because the joint enters so quickly.
And when the patient's joint is completely relaxed according to each of the ways that are possible for you, and then cover it with a large quantity of wool; then place a plaster made from flour and egg white on top of the muscle, so that it is turned over itself, and then tighten it at the knuckle with a strap; and let the joint be turned over the plaster, and the hand be connected to its neck, and let it not be moved for seven days.
And when the patient' hand is rested enough so that the member is comfortable, because it becomes easier to heal it.
Then give them more food after seven days or less, and exercise the movement; and if it does not soften and become easier, then it is healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that occurs on it or for any other reason, then according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization, three caustic substances should be used:
And if it still does not heal and has been seven days since the dislocation, then a few spots of caustic substance should be applied to it, and if that does not work, and the joint does not become stiff and firm again, then you will know that the nerves in it, which are at the end of the muscle, have split or stretched out or softened, and you will know that the joint will never heal in its place.
From the dislocation of that hand or leg, the reduction should be done with a sudden and swift movement towards the body, while returning to its position should be slow and gentle.
And the other constraint should be applied to it, and that cure should be used until it is healed.
And if there is a heavy burden on the member and delay in its movement, then the patient should use bathwater that has been heated to ease the burden and restore the member's natural function first.
Chapter 27.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with great difficulty and seems to return with great difficulty; and it is dislocated at both ends, mainly at the front and back, and when the dislocated shoulder is adjusted with the hand's movement, it is clearly stated that the joint is convex and cannot bend the arm or touch it to its muscle.
And if you have these symptoms, then reduce the dislocation as soon as possible because, if it goes to the shoulder joint, difficult is its reduction, and fort it does not heal completely; and more so when it is at the back because there are many types of shoulder dislocations, and they cause great pain, and some of them give death quickly.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand be extended with two arms, and the muscles be spread out, and the other side be placed on top of the shoulder, and let it press the joint with the back of the hand, or with the palm, so that it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is at the front end, then return it so that it bends at the wrist with the palm facing itself.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer violent heat quickly and strongly.
And that two ministers extend their arms, and have this extension of two ministers so that it is not shaken by the heat.
Then turn the arms around completely, because it is wrapped in a long cloth over the hand, or limb.
And when the hand touches the joint with its palm, oil it with some oil to help it move easily; and immediately press the joint with a violent push so that it returns to its place.
Then the reduction of it should be done on top of a paste that is stiffened with egg white, and stretched with salt, and let it be suspended from its neck, and left alone for several days.
Then it should be relaxed; and if the joint returns to its place, then you release the member from its body, and leave it alone.
And if you see that the joint is not strong, then you repeat the paste and member release, and leave it alone for several days before stretching again; and then release it.
If there is a heavy burden on the reduction of the joint and its movement, then administer bathwater with friction and compression, but make it lighter; or pause over the joint and let it rest, and leave it alone for the day and night. Then wrap the member in a bath; and when it is hot, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and immediately repeat the rubbing on top of the joint so that it rubs, and the third time, Corruption has already begun to spread on the denuded flesh inside the bath, but it is limited.
And if you wish, pause over that cow's hide that is wet and scraped with the edge, and rub it gently; because that hide is wet and you restore its movement.
Chapter 28.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder (continued).
A few veins of the hand are dislocated, and the reduction of it is light, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it is important to know that the speed of reducing a dislocated joint in an hour when it is separated from its place is faster than when it occurs within the caustic substance.
And the reduction of the dislocated joint is that you place the knuckle of the hand on a table and have a minister extend the hand, and have the other side placed on top of its joint, or hold it near the joint, and press it with the palm so that it returns to its place.
However, it is important to consider if the palm is already showing when the hand is closed; then place the two hands on a table before extending and reducing; and if the dislocation occurs previously, then have the two hands placed on top of each other, and let the knuckles meet with the palms; and if the dislocation occurred later, then place the two hands on the table, so that the knuckles of one hand are against the palm of the other.
And therefore, if you return soon, it is good; but if not, then wait for him to be well-healed and healed; and do not do this again, because unless he suffers or can no longer tolerate the reduction of his hernia, more days will pass without improvement.
But the Roman joint is second to its tortuosity; and there is no cause for the patient, except that his hand is swollen and cannot be tightened for any reason; therefore you know that the nerves are twisted or torn, and do not press them in one place because they will tighten again, and give them some strength.
Therefore, if you have returned to health, then pause on the patch that we have removed and let it heal and get stronger over a few days; and then remove it again and exercise his hand.
But if his movement remains stiff and occurs in the hand some pain or discomfort; then gently rub it with water and some oil, until it is relieved.
Chapter.
On the treatment of dislocations.
Some injuries may be dislocated at first.
And when a digit is dislocated at the first joint of the hand or foot, then tighten it and push the dislocation back into place, unless it returns on its own.
And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that part in which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then hang it up and stretch it out until the third day.
And when night comes, let him lie in that position according to the previous description, and do not stop removing it on the third day and exercising his hand, and let him sleep at night; and make him strict for a few days until he is well.
And make him similar to himself, if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and let him lie on that side, and perform the first operation on his digit, unless he is healed.
And make him similar to himself when it is dislocated at other joints.
Chapter.
On the treatment of dislocations of the spine on the arm.
When a complete dislocation of the spine on the arm or neck occurs, and the bones come out of their places, then there is no cure for this, because death comes to the patient.
And this is the reason that the vomit of the patient is outside his will, and he cannot hold it back; and some limbs of him or two legs or two arms of him become soft, because bones are broken in four places; and the dislocation of them to four parts is accomplished.
Therefore that person has been dislocated at the back joints and is called gelbosity.
But the treatment of him is that you should consider if the gelbosity occurs from youth, because there is no cure or remedy for it in general.
But in that person who has been dislocated by a sudden blow or by a fall or by chance to those, the ancient doctors have said many methods of treatment with long speech, of which the least returns and is renewed by me from another instrument, with which I have treated him and made him well.
And of those, there is no cure except that which occurs in the hand, which I have removed.
And that the patient lie on his face with his head turned to one side, and be extended on the other side of him an instrument wet with water so that it does not rub against his feet.
Then place a firm stick under his head, fixed in the ground at the end of the foot where it turns, and another under his feet at the other end of the foot;
And the minister hold one stick, and does not put it in a hole; and the other minister holds the other according to that form.
Then wrap his head in a cloth and tie it securely; then extend the end of the limb that is at the top of the stick, which supports his head, and let him lie on it; and then adjust all the limbs and let them lie on the other stick, which should support his feet.
Then the minister drops one limb at the end of the stick, and does not lock the two sticks and limbs in their places; but they should be left loose in this way, as we have said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns to its place, or on a table, and should adjust his feet on the table until it returns to its place.
But if it does not return in this way, then find a table whose length or width is at an angle of three bras to one side from where the patient lies; and dig into the wall on that side at which end of the table. Then the minister should place the table's leg on the spine, and the doctor his feet on the other end; then he should adjust himself so that the spine is held in its place, and let him return to his place.
And if you wish, open the trap which is rolled up at the feet; and it should be that you lie on your back with your head at the end of two sticks, whose length is a palm, and your feet at the other end; and make the length between each stick a palm, and already it has been made in such a way that when one runs down it turns, and the other is held firm on the ground so that it does not roll.
And let there be a round stick in which is the trap, and it is rolled up in the two traps of the two sticks;
And at the end of him is a trap in which the stick is rolled up, whose length is a palm with which it is rolled up; and in the other two sticks is the same as this one.
Then adjust the limbs that you have tightened in the feet of the patient on the trap in which the head should lie, and adjust the limbs that you have tightened on the legs of the patient on the table in which the feet should lie; and make those same adjustments as these ones.
Then it is right that each trap should be opened and a minister twist the trap with his hand, and the doctor tighten the spine as we have said.
Then when the spine has returned to its place and is wrapped up, then put on a dry cloth on the table with a hole in which you can put your foot; then cover it over with an oil cloth and make it firm. And if it is necessary to return the limb to its place, then do so; and let him lie on that side where the gelbosity occurred.
Then make him use the limb that we have said, and give him subtle food to eat until he is well.
And if there is some urgency in the place at the end of the cure, then make him take medicines that moilify and soften by long time, which we have recommended; and already it has been administered in that place a plate of lead.
And in some cases there is imminent danger at the rear of the two vertebrae, and that is caused by dislocation; and that is the bone which I have already touched so that it does not come to be done prosompcion to him with this medicine because it will fort make you to happen death.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Do you know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not occur except by dislocation so much, and do not happen to those water that happen to other joints with little movement and concave.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated inwardly, or outwardly, or forward, or backward.
And most often it is dislocated inwardly, and less so forward or backward.
And the sign of a hip dislocation inwardly is that when you adjust the curve of the hip to the hip, it is longer and the back is more curved than before, and the hip cannot bend the leg without pain, and this is the place that stops the pain from stopping suddenly so that the top of the thigh has already come here.
And the sign of one who has a dislocation outwardly is that the accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
And the sign of one who has a dislocation backward is that he expands his own curve according to suit, but above all he does not bend that part which hurts him behind, and if he tries to walk on it, his urine is repressed and his limb becomes swollen, and he must walk with a stick.
And the sign of one who has a dislocation backward is that he does not expand the back, nor can he bend that part in front which bends the hip, and his curve is shorter than the other, and the swelling of his limb is softened, and the top of the thigh has already come to this place.
But the reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, so it is already advanced with age; therefore, administer to him a reduction of it according to his disposition, then it does not come to be done prosompcion.
But in that one of the dislocation is recent and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should cut off to water that turns the joint and extends it to the inside and outside, and makes it turn to the right and left, because it easily returns and does not require another cure.
But, if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong medicine and extend the curve of him from behind, or against his back, or against his chest, and another minister extends the hand of him above the instep that he touches his foot; and another minister tightens the ligament under the sole of his foot, and another minister tightens the ligature on the root of the thigh, and holds it so that it does not slip.
And it should be cut off from him or from the inside to the joint of the hip, or from behind to the joint of the two;
And this cutting off should be done in one way, so that the hip is raised to the ground and that it hangs down by its rope.
This species of cutting off is specific to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns to the water that we have mentioned, it is good; but if not, then all species are necessary water in the treatment of itself.
In the self-reduction of himself when dislocated, and if the dislocation is inwardly, then the hip should be placed on its back; and place the ligatures over the root of the thigh in that place between the top of the thigh and the place where it hurts to touch it; and extend the ligature above the joint of the hip, or below the joint of the two.
And another minister should hold his legs firmly, and squeeze the large part of the hip with a violent hand, and extend it outwardly by an abrupt movement, because that one returns to its place.
And this species is the lightest treatment with which this limb can be reduced, better than with any of the other species.
But if you do not obey this treatment with this species of the treatment of all, then you should tie both feet of him together with a strong ligature, softly, on the toes and on the backs.
And be the length of each one with the quantity of four fingers, and let the hip curve be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And the hip should be suspended on its head and be in the middle; and be the length of him from the ground the quantity of two bras.
And command a strong youth to cut the top of the thigh, and another youth should hang the hip from him, and the other youth should cut the thigh with a quick movement, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in the self-reduction when it is dislocated outwardly, then the hip should rest on the ground according to what we have said, and that it be held by its rope; and the ligature should be tightened on the curve of him, specifically and on his feet.
And two poles should be placed, the one under his feet and the other on his head; and two poles should be raised up, one in front of him and the other behind him; and the two poles should be raised up so that the hip does not slip by them, because the extension to the inside is not pulled.
And each minister should extend in its part, and the medicine should drink it according to art.
And when the dislocation is forward, then the curve should be extended slightly, and this is according to this story about a tree; and the medicine stops his palm from touching his hip, and immediately cuts it with the other palm, and extends it to the inside of the hip to the outside.
And if the dislocation is backward, then you should not extend the hip to the inside, but it is raised up by its own feet on the ground; and as soon as it stops from touching a hard thing, then, according to what we have said about the extension of his hips over two large beams, and that is under its face and the ligatures are extended.
And that compression should be administered to him on a table in the place where he feels the joint.
And the end of the reduction is that he does not turn away from you, but that you extend two beams to him, and when you see those rope and the hip expands its back slightly, then you should know that the other limb has returned; and you should tie him to rest for three days or four.
And take off the ligature and the bandage, and compare the one curve to the other.
Then, if you see those knees in their place, know that the dislocation is already closed, and let them go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then turn back and put that in place, and take out that second one according to your first stretch, and leave it for three days.
Then remove that, and let that one walk a little late for a few days until he is comfortable.
Chapter.
Of treatment of dislocation from the knie
The dislocation is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated at the outside joints, and at the inside joints, and at the joints of the sides more towards the outside joints, but not dislocated at the front joints.
And the sign of dislocation from him is that you command the patient to apply his chest to the cushion; then you will know that the dislocation has occurred.
And the restoration of all his ways is that you make him extend his chest, and then, if he can stand on it; place his feet under his hips, and then make him adhere his knees to his chest, and make them press against his chest; and another minister extends his feet within so that the dislocated one returns to his place.
And the sign of recovery from him is that his chest adheres to the cushion without effort.
Then return it and make the chest adhere to the cushion, then tie them up with a cloth for three days or four, then remove them.
And do not use the patient for walking for a few days until he is healed and comfortable.
But if his reduction to you is prevented, then administer firmly with the joint of his foot in the treatment of the hand preceding the narrative.
Chapter.
Of the treatment of dislocation from the head.
The head sometimes gets up again by little movement, and sometimes is dislocated completely, and the dislocation is made either at the inside joints or at the outside joints.
And the sign of dislocation from him is that the head swells up according to the joint in which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of movement from him is of light recovery, and it is done with ease according to his hand, and then he is put back in place so that he returns.
But in the treatment of him when he is dislocated completely, cover that you make the patient extend his right leg, and have another minister hold the joint from behind at the place of his head.
Then turn to him towards the right hand with the leg of the uppermost part, and towards your left hand with the leg of the lowermost part in its cavity.
Then turn his feet to you with the right hand, and then with the left for two turns, and then extend them with the left; and put the feet of the foot on the right side with the chest at work.
Then make him turn twice as you have counted.
Then extend his feet to the chest on the third turn, and you are in its cavity.
Then return him once or twice in this way, and if the foot swells up, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation, for it will return.
But if you are prohibited from reducing the patient by water which we have mentioned, then make the servant walk on his two feet on the earth, and place a cloth between the knees of the patient, and wrap him in a blanket to prevent him from slipping.
Then the servant of him holds his knees, and another minister extends his feet towards his heels or towards a cloth stretched over the top of his foot; and then extend those of the minister against the extension of his own hand, and make the cloth be extended between the knees of the patient to prevent him from slipping; and make the servant walk on his two feet so that his knees do not touch his heels.
Then the doctor swallows up the dislocation with his hand, and another minister holds the knee at the sides, because the dislocation returns easily.
And so when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction from him, then stop applying the paste and take out that with a strong joint, and bind his feet to the chest.
But if you fear or keep yourself from the nerves which are behind on the head, that the joint over it is not violent and it is held fast firmly.
Then leave him alone for two days or three; and if the joint softens, take out that one.
Then remove that one on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for ten days. But if it is necessary to walk in front of that space, it is not necessary that the dislocation should be over him dissolved and corrupted, and then apply treatment.
And if he swells up with a fever after you have administered him in the treatment of dislocation from him which preceded the narrative, in another place of treatment and remedy, so that it gets well again.
Chapter.
Of treatment of dislocation of the feet.
But if that which is dislocated is put back in place by little movement, and it is not difficult to walk forward a little.
But if the dislocation is in one of the two feet, then cover that you make the patient extend his right leg on a bench or table, and let him walk as if he were walking alone.
Then turn the feet to you with the right hand, and then with the left, and then extend them with the left; and then put them back in their places so that they do not appear in the same way again.
Then place the navel of his foot on a table which is turned towards him with both feet, and then extend them with the left hand, and then put them back in their places so that they do not appear in the same way again; and then leave him alone for three days; and then remove that one and make it rest for four days before walking, so that it does not fall and its recovery is assured.
Chapter.
Of the types of dislocation which are caused by water or by fracture or by some other cause.
When any cause of those occurs, and you are engaged in the treatment of that person and his recovery, then you will see success many times.
And do not think that the treatment of him is to boast about; but go out with mildness and mercy, and put up a little at first, and then more as needed; and leave the patient to God's judgment, but if you hope for his salvation from harm, then relieve his suffering with kindness, and show him some hope. Then strive hard first to reduce him because of the cause, before he becomes sick with fever.
Then if the member returns as we wish, then administer to him the medicine which causes fever and cure the plague with water which is sent to him by those who have dried it up.
And if the dislocation is caused by fracture and the bones are separated, then you strive to mend them, and make them fit into place in this water which has been mentioned before in the places of those.
Here is the translation of the text: Thus ends the words of Al-Bucasia perfectly as to which God is pleased. A messiess que sien per tu servat la tua saucell, e mays le vostri cos servass a Dios in saucells, e in saucells de la saucell.
