O, son children, I present to you this book, which is the last of medical science, to its completion, therefore, the end of it, and for the explanations, and declarations of it, I see that I fulfill that to you with this treatise, which is a beginning of surgery.
For the operation on the body is set down in our land and in our time, all of which greatly dangers the science of it, and the traces of it remain; and except for a few small descriptions in books of the Ancients, they have changed the most and in those situations error and confusion arise, within that their sentences are closed and the force of it is elongated and the art.
And I see that I fulfill that to you with this order of treatment in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for it to come with forms of instruments of cautery and other tools of the work by addition of the statement, and for preparation of it, which necessary cause is.
The reason that no good artisan works on his body in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that before him being exercised in the science of anatomy which discovers Guila within it; he knows the growth of members and their shapes, as well as their connection and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their numbers, and the shape of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their emission.
And therefore I say that a certain name is necessary, in the work small, and more so in the art of the body.
And we have already said that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not aware that I told him about anatomy, it is not known to me that they fall into an error because so many people die, as I have seen with some of them, since they are formed from this science and get out of that one by experience.
For I have seen a doctor who was a young man and an experienced one had hit an abscess of scrofula in the neck of a woman, and he hit some arteries of the neck, so that blood flowed out strongly from it, causing the woman to die among its people.
And I have seen another doctor who thought that he would swallow a stone from a man in his state; and the stone was large, and he brought it to him and cut it with a piece of the bladder, so that this man died on the third day.
And I have called it to be removed and I have seen that because of the size of the stone, and the patient's state, I knew that he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who took payment from a Duke of our country to perform an operation; and there he put his hand on the patient's hip, which was already broken, and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, removing the fracture from the hip, on top of sawdust and needles to make it tighter, and not leaving it at the hip's spi
And he followed his desires, and he followed prayer, and he left it at that for many days, and commanded us to remove the ligament; and thus, within that the hip was broken and the wound was open, it came to ruin.
And I was called to do so, and I prepared myself to remove the ligament, and achieved peace and relief of its pains.
But corruption was already established in the member, so I could not restrain it, and I did not stop walking the corruption in the member until the patient perished.
And I have seen another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and it became an ulcer within a few days, so that the malignancy of it grew up to its lord.
The reason is because the cancerous cauterization is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not cover that it comes to him by all means, but that it is in a member that you suffer from all of them.
For thus, children, it is necessary for you that the operation on the body be divided into two operations; one is an operation that is associated with health, and another work in which there is danger to the greatest extent.
And I have already presented in this book wherever there is a mistake and fear in it; so that it is necessary for you to keep it away from you and not allow it to turn to speaking and displease you.
And therefore take your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your diseases with faith and with steadfastness.
And use the best way with the grace of God, that you may arrive at salvation and blessedness; leave behind the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and hold your arms from which you are afraid, so that you may not hesitate in your faith and in your name, for it remains to your glory, and then go to heaven and before your sanctities.
Guilac already said in some of his admonitions: "Do not treat a bad disease, so that you do not have to take care of a sick doctor."
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first section. The first chapter is ordered from the head, in the shapes of the instruments and the tools of the cauterizations, and from that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second section: The second chapter is ordered from the head in the forms of the operation by the art of medicine; and from that which it is necessary for the doctor to know his causes, and his consequences, and how to treat each one, and what he cannot do.
The third chapter is ordered from the head in the forms of that art; and from that which it is necessary for the doctor to know his causes and consequences.
I will tell you the quality of the materials of cauterization and the substances that prevent it; and in which combination it should be used.
Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of cauterization and the prevention of it is long and elaborate, subtle in science, and hidden in meaning; and I have heard much wisdom from them, and they disagree with each other, and enough for me is a small part of their speeches, frightening in length.
And therefore I say that cauterization confers on the whole combination universally the same substance; except for two combinations, which are combinations of fire and air.
In the combination of fire and air, different opinions exist; some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for a disease by quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable that a disease be cured by fire and dry, which are different from each other.
And he who says that what is contrary to this is true, that the cauterization causes healing in all the illnesses of the body and dried out ones which occur in the members of men: for when you compare the man's body with the moisture of fire, you find his body dry.
And I say through the speech of that one, who has already experienced it several times at my expense.
But however I do not cover that it came upon this one already completely exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cauterizing by later exercise, and has known the difference of the complexes of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their bodies, and the causes of those, and the accidents of their, and the space of time of those.
But in the other complexes, there is no fear for you, and more so in the wet and infectious illnesses because all doctors have agreed on those, and they have not disagreed about healing them by cauterizing them.
And know, children, that of the secret of healing by fire and the goodness of it, it is on the healing by burning, for the fire is simple, and its effect does not reach any member except the one that is cauterized, and causes no little harm to the other member with which it is placed except with a small touch.
But the effect of the burning medicine reaches that in the members which it dries up, and it greatly hurts to make it come out in the member with difficult healing and strongly hurts when it is applied.
But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not hurt anyone but makes it flow out excessively; And this has already been known by experience and through the long service of study on the truth of causes, and by my own experience with fire in my body, and the quality of the operation of it in the members and the expelling of them through which it expels the illnesses, I would demonstrate it philosophically, which would be pointed out in your minds.
And know, children, that the times do not agree when it is necessary to make a cauterization and pause the best time of the spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the harm by the accident of time is immersed in the healing of this one on which cauterization is applied, and more so if cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer delay because those which come with evil are greater than a little harm entering through time.
And thus you do not harm your own feet, or children, this one is considered only by the common people and foolish doctors, because it is not convenient to make a cauterization on that illness that is healed by cauterizing at all times, and pause that consequence.
And the cause is not good to do so because cauterization is not a medicine that changes the complex of things and dries up the humors which are the causes for which pains come.
But however cauterization in excess over medicine by virtue of its goodness, the usefulness of its operation, and the greatness of its Lord.
And it is possible that the illness which has been given to him returns in some hour of time, according to the complex of the patient and the location of his illness, and its goodness; and that which is prepared in his body from the addition of excesses to him, and that which has come to him through food and similar causes of those causes; but if the illness on which he was given cauterization is a subtle illness in some member with little excess and moisture, then cauterization for pain and similar things makes it possible that in him it does not return that pain, but it becomes smaller.
And however the popular speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a harsh speech, not towards him who understands it, for I believe that it does not heal anyone by medicine or by any other cause; but cauterization itself is healing.
And the cause is opposite to this; and I intend that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine when we administer the methods of healing in some illnesses, but those medicines do not cure them, and at the end of the illness we give a person cauterization, and it heals him at the end of the illness. And I reply from here that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the speech which I understand from the common people and foolish doctors.
And they say that fire is better to heal by than iron, and do not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cauterization does not hurt, unless it is absolutely true, because I have seen and felt that fire does not do that to some people except those who have other members, and cauterizing with iron is good for them as they say; but when you make cauterization with fire in gold, it is not declared to you, for it is unknown according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of gold, and because it prepares itself to receive heat; and if you apply a small piece of it over the gold, it makes gold melt by the fire, and case in the fire some sheets so that the artisan cuts himself with his occupation.
And to make cauterization with iron, it is necessary to put it gently and then more carefully on the operation.
And I have ordered this chapter in the cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those of the chapter within the feet, so that I can answer anyone who asks about it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers to moisture and cold on the servile accident of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of sodom and many flows of rheumatic, called cursing, from the head to the parts of the body and the ears flowing, and many sleeping, and toothache and the goyleiro, and generally of any illness that comes through coldness; but it also makes it paralytically, and is a cause of sodom and apoplexy, and similar things in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is this: first, order the patient to be evacuated by lacative medicine on his head, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the goodness of the illness and its age and its usual habit.
And then order him to shave his head with a razor, and then place the blade between your legs on a bank that has been raised up, and place your hands over the surface of it.
And then pause the motion of your hand close to the edge of your palm above the edge of his nose between his ears. But however, when the patient says that his place is reached, mark that place with a probe, and then ignite cauterization from it by olive oil; for this one is the form of it:
And then place that above the marked place with the probe in a way that it goes down little by little, and you turn that around.
And then remove your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see any amount of hair from the head, as well as the amount of salt that has come out, then raise your hand, and if it does not go back to iron, then take another piece from that, if it is cold, until he sees bone.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days.
And then place a piece of wood in the fire until it is burned up. And then cure the wound with a fourfold medicine until it heals.
And already they say that when the Roman plague has broken out, so much better and more beneficial is it for healing and rejuvenating.
And they also say that it is necessary to cauterize the bone within the cavity of the skull, and that the cautery should not touch any part of the brain.
Then let water be applied that is close to the bone, and then let it be cured.
And others say that the cautery should reach as far as possible into the bone, and this is how it is done to make it stronger: And they consider that the vapors from the head should be exhausted.
And the plague should remain open for a long time, and then it should be cured within so that it hardens.
Perhaps these two types of cautery are not as useful in all cases, but rather only sometimes, for the sake of saving life; because the head is a distinct part from the rest of the body, and more so when it belongs to an ill-fated patient.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better for saving life, in my opinion; and from that I infer that this process should be used to heal.
Second:
The cauterization of the head.
When in total the head causes chronic and long-term pain and water is present in the patient for a prolonged period, and it employs the use of scalpel and scissors and poultices and plasters and gauze and cataplasms and poultices, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery that was not used again after applying to one of those causes, then consider that because the head is a strongly created thing in its nature; and it does not produce much fever or heat, then cauterize it again with another cautery. Then let him cauterize the top of his head with a cautery within so that the bone does not break. Cut the bone and expose the quantity that we have mentioned, then cauterize it with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place called "vas", â€” which is the place where the wind blows. And you will have less pain in doing so, for the water causes great pain that is different from the pain of all other types of head cauterization.
And this cautery should be performed in its place, for when the cautery with which the top of the head and the back are cauterized is subtler than the cautery applied to the front part of the head; and this is the way to do it.
Third:
The cauterization of the temporal lobe.
When pain is hard in the back of the head, or it is located within the ear, wash out the skull with medicine, and administer another treatment, which I have described in the various treatments for illnesses; and if it does not respond, then cauterize it using two methods: either with burning medicine or with iron.
Perhaps cauterizing with burning medicine is better than taking a mixture of ale and pouring it over the head, and rubbing both ends with the hand. Then cut the place where the pain is located in the temporal lobe with a sharp object within so that it does not break, and hide the bone.
Then tighten it around the head with a tight constriction, and leave it for three hours; then take off the cloth, and leave the plague submerged in water for two or three days, and let him rest on the edge of the bed.
Then cure that person with cold medicine so that they are healed.
If you wish, I can send you some of the burning medicines that I have written in the second medical treatise.
Perhaps cauterizing with iron according to this method is better:
And it is called a nut, because the head of man is thus shaped like a nut and in its middle part there is a small depression.
Then place your hand over the painful part, and hold it so that the iron does not move; and turn the small iron slowly with a quick movement.
And if the amount of blood that is absorbed through the skin of the skull reaches about half of what it usually does, then raise your hand so that the artery is not affected and the blood flow is stopped.
Then dip the cloth in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then remove the cloth with care from the edge of the bed, and heal with cold medicine.
If you wish, cauterize the end of the knife according to the cauterization method mentioned earlier; and be careful not to cut any arteries in this temporal lobe.
Fourth:
The cauterization of the ancient temporal lobe.
When you treat the temporal lobe with water that has been mentioned in the previous treatment, and with water that has been mentioned in the various treatments for illnesses, and if the treatment does not respond, and often because of the illness for which the water was used as a treatment does not respond to it; then ignite the knife-like cauterization so that it whitenizes, since this indicates that it is applying to the place of pain with a long line that covers most of it, or with another line; and then pause your hand for a moment, and then tighten it around the head tightly so that it does not move.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is connected to mastication, and that the tongue does not move and get stuck; and that spasm does not occur.
And if you are careful to avoid any bleeding from the artery that is being cut off, because in the process of cutting it there is danger, and more so if you do not know how to respond to water; then leave the operation at the beginning.
And I remember the reminder of the accident with the flow of blood that occurred during the iron's work according to your way, in its place.
If this illness does not respond to the treatment mentioned earlier and makes the patient's life difficult, then cauterize it in its middle part of the head as we have described, and heal the plague so that it is healed.
If you wish, administer the cauterization mentioned in the second part of the text with two knives, and this is the best method; it will be more effective.
Fifth:
The cauterization of ear pain.
When there is pain in the ears and it is treated with lancing and with the other treatment mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not go away; then burn the cauterization, and this is the one that has no specific name; its form is as follows:
Then place the iron on the aching part and turn it around quickly; or make a circle with it around the whole ear, or in the middle of it if the pain is located there. Along with the iron along the edge of the earlobe slowly and carefully so as not to burn the skin.
And if the cauterization of the points on all sides of the foot is necessary, then put it into place, and take care of the areas that need healing until they are cured.
Chapter VI.
On the Cauterization of Burns.
Burn wounds, which are cured with cauterization, are not due to any substance that enters through the blood vessels, as we have stated in the division of hernia.
Avoid cauterizing with a substance that enters by way of drying or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this kind of burn with jerks and purgatives and enemas, and your treatment does not work, then when you cauterize the hernia, do so with three cauterizations: the first on the side of the foot, the second on the top part of the foot, and the third on the union of two toes.
And pause the small cauterization on the opposite side of the hernia, for softening does not occur except in the part that is affected and healed.
And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize it with a small piece of iron on the top side of the foot, above the tip of the big toe, and in the middle, another one the length of the foot, and pause your hand so that the amount of the substance of the hernia is burned;
This is the method of cauterization, and it is special with the knife, the shape of which is placed before you. However, a little more carefully it is done that this may not be too much; and when the knife goes on, a little of the excess of gruel is removed.
And then take care of the areas that have been burned with water until they are healed.
Chapter VII.
On the Cauterization of Old Apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with water as we have said, and your treatment does not work on the hernia, and there is no fever, then cauterize it with four cauterizations: on all the corners of the head; and on the top part of the head, as we have said; and on the nape. And the method of the cauterization is done according to what has been said.
And it is then cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, and a little more; and then water is applied to it that has been burned.
Chapter VIII.
On the Cauterization of New Apoplexy and Obliation Done by Flame.
Then give the hernia in the beginning with large jerks and pills, telling them a story.
And then shave the patient's head completely, and place on his chest the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
And pause a few moments, for this is a way of cauterizing. And then apply water according to the order that we have already mentioned.
So if it heals well, then do so; but if not, then make three cauterizations on the back part of the head, those being sending off from the top side of the head to the bottom side of the head. And between each cauterization pause the thickness of the knife, and then take care of the cauterization with water that has been applied.
But if the patient is drinking water, then do not apply cauterization in that place; and if you see a greater amount of water being drunk, then cauterize it on the top side of the foot.
Then take care of those that are healed; and let the cauterization be olive-colored according to the shape that has been given.
Chapter IX.
On the Cauterization of Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body.
Then process in the softening of the head with jerks and water as we have said; and then shave the patient' s head, and then cauterize it in the middle of the head, and on all the corners, and on the back part, and on the two sides.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of three people and the two serve who carry out the softening; and if the hernia is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the back, and lastly apply cauterization within the hernia itself, and hold your hand. Then take care of those that are healed; and let the cauterization be olive-colored.
Chapter X.
On the Cauterization of Hernias.
It is not cauterized with epilepsy, but this kind of epilepsy is caused by a substance that enters through the blood vessels.
Then, in the beginning of treatment, the brain is softened with jerks and another treatment that we have mentioned when the hernia is large and tolerates the experience of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer to it enemas and purgatives before water by days for the benefit of food.
Then shave the patient' s head, and then cauterize it with one cauterization in the middle of the head as we have said before, and another on the top part of the head, and on all the corners; and let the head be cauterized. And if the hernia is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize it with the methods that I have described, in softening of the body over the spines of the neck and the spine.
Let the cauterization be olive-colored according to what has come before.
But if the hernia is a child, then pause in cauterizing with this method.
Chapter XI.
On the Cauterization and Softening near the Mint Article.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and gross flame, then cauterize it with the methods that we have said in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is too much exercise leading to melancholy, and the patient' s body is moist, then give a drink of water that softens the brain according to what has come before in the division.
Then shave the patient' s head, and then make a small fire burning on the top part of the head, and pause it in the middle of the head;
And if the hernia is four days old, and it has been held in all its parts.
Then pause the liniment; and it is now suitable for a springtime shearing of sheep. And scald that over the fire with moderate heat according to what has been said, and let it suffer when it is half done. Then return it in the middle of the head of the patient on the circle; and let it cool down.
And then give water to the patient once a week in one case, and in another, treat with an enema; or, if you wish, cauterize it with small points according to what has been said before: this is a special kind of cauterization that softens the brain by equal amounts.
Then pause that piece in between gray and yellow.
Chapter XII.
On the Cauterization and Softening near the Mint Article.
When the patient begins to sweat through his hair, as I have described in the division, then begin and give him water that will clear his head, and guard against all humidity.
And make a bath of cold water for several days.
And bring him to a mirror and cauterize his head at the base of his skull; and cauterize it twice with two cautery wands if it is the beginning of sweat in two sockets, or one line if it is the beginning of sweat in one socket.
Cut all the veins and arteries that remain with a cauterium; and place the cautery in length in the latitude of the temples.
And guard against bleeding when you cauterize; and if there is any bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine, which is possible for you to have.
And I come with wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries and at their absence and guards against bleeding.
And some veins are cauterized in his neck between two bones with two wands that move quickly.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears from the sockets are ancient and flow well through the veins and arteries that are in the manifest place of the head, and it is shown that they are superfluous phlegmatic tears, then cauterize it with a cautery that we have described in the beginning of water flowing into the sockets, and with a cautery at the base of the skull, and with two cauteries in the temples, and with two cauteries between two bones in the neck. And if you feel pain, then cauterize it all the way across the cheek from the ear to the temple with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cauterization of a foul odor from the nose.
When you treat him with water that we have described in the division and do not continue your treatment, then return to your original treatment after three nights; and cut his hair, and cauterize it with a cauldron of olive oil. And cauterize it with a clove wand on the two temples between the hair and a small wand.
And guard against bleeding that does not erupt.
This is the form of the clove cautery.
Chapter XV.
Of cauterization to soften the eyelids of the sockets.
When the eyelid of the socket is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize it with a lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you want to, then cauterize it between the two temples with a small wand that is long. Be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
Do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery, more according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is softened.
Chapter XVI.
Of cauterization to the eyelid of the socket when the hair is turned inward and turns the patient's hand.
When the hair of the socket is turned inward in such a way that it can be pried up, then cauterize it with fire or burning medicine.
If you use fire for cauterization, bring the patient forward where it is not hot, and let the hair fall out on its own; but if he needs to have it pried up, then strengthen his eyebrows with a cloth so that they do not burn, until the hair falls out; and if he wants to stop sweating, then tie him up in a cloth.
Then, when they are shaved and plucked, bring the patient to a table, and place his head in a certain position, and mark out the shape of an owl on his eyebrows, and this is the beginning of marking out according to the figure of an owl; and it is the beginning of marking.
And then put a black cloth over his eyebrows or a wet sponge.
Then light the cautery, and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the mark according to its form, little by little, until it is burned through the surface of the hair; and this is done with an owl' shape, completely burnt.
The sign of health for this work is that you see the eyelids of the socket already contracted, and that the hair is lifted up from the punch of the socket.
Then raise your hand and leave it alone for three days, and then place it on a cloth to make the hair grow again. And then treat that one with oil within so that it is healed.
But if the hair falls out for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do it again with a different cautery first.
But if the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize it within so that it is lifted to its natural place and plucked, and may not pinch the socket.
But if the cautery is with burning medicine, this is what you should order for the patient to remove the hair within so that it is plucked, and may be done with a cloth.
Then take a clean cloth and a sharp knife. (I) Then mix those two things together, and make a paste of it so that it does not dry out; then spread the paste on the cloth according to the figure of an owl, and place it over one ear; and leave the patient in a certain position.
Then put that paste on him and wait a little while, and do not press it too hard so that the patient feels the burning of the medicine; for the burning is in him.
Then, when he feels the burning of the medicine, then let him lie down and leave the medicine alone; and when it stops burning, then wash his face with water; and if his eye has been cut, then do not worry, for it will be healed; but if it has not been cut, then do not worry.
Then place that cloth on the edge to make the hair grow again; then treat that one with oil within, or with another thing, so that it is healed.
You must be careful in your operation to keep the medicine from falling onto the socket, and if the eyelid is softened by any reason because of the hair, then repeat your treatment on that spot where the eyelid is softened, and at the beginning, put it where it is healed; and properly so.
This is the form of an owl' shape.
The sockets of men are different according to their size and age. And now, according to this, your contracture must be made.
And do not hide the way of treatment from anyone who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal socket of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with water that we have described in the divisions of the face, and do not continue your treatment, then bring him to the table and make him lie down on his back; and hold his head between two pillows so that it does not move or be disturbed while he sleeps.
And place a sharp point in the humors of the person or in a muck of feathers over their chest.
Then set fire to the cautery, which has this form:
which is curved, then as it is in the shape of a cane or a staff, from one end make the point where the cautery will be made.
And if you see, let it pierce into the other end. And if you want, then put it out this way.
However, that which is curved is better for the job.
Then squeeze the tube if it has opened, and drain and dry that person. And if it is not opened, then open it and remove the pus from it.
Then place the cautery which has been well lit on their chest and at the root of the nose, so that your hand or the patient's does not shake, and then pause the cautery on the skin of the chest and burn it off.
And then if at the beginning of the fire bone enters into the body, it is good; and if not, then go over the cautery once or twice, as needed, and leave it like that for three days, and then place it on the point with oil of rose and dry it off before applying it.
However if they have been burning for eleven days and are not healed, then place acute corrosive medicine on them so that the bone is uncovered and trim it as needed in their chapter.
And this is another way to cauterize a fistula, which the first two said: Go to the spot of the fistula and pour out and place a sharp point in the crack which is subtle in shape; and put in there one ounce of molten lead; and if your hand is firm and does not sweat, so that the lead does not come to the chest of the person; and cover that up on the chest of the patient with a muck of feathers or water, for lead clings to the spot of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is healed by the water that I have spoken of in the cauterization and cure, then it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a drop from the nose and bring the fistula to its place in the nose according to where it will come out.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Cauterization of a Fistula.
Faded spots may occur in the lips, and most commonly in the lips of children.
So if you cure those cracks with the water that we have spoken about in the divisions and do not profit from the cure, then set fire to a small blade according to this form which is made:
and place it on the cavity of the person according to the subtlety of the blade.
Then place that carefully in those cracks so that the fire comes into the base of the cracks.
Then cure it with care, so that it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, there is a swelling and it breaks out, and then it is broken and crusted over, and then it oozes, and then it forms a fistula, and then you cure that and do not profit from the cure, then cover that with oil of rose which has been well heated, and place on the fistula's root, so that the fire does not reach the base of it, and at the back of it make one or two go over; and then cure that with water which we have spoken about in the cure, until it is healed.
And if the person has been healing and is healed, then it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the spot and heat the bone rotten as needed in their chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Veins.
When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then cure those with medicine and do not confer with me, then place the head of the patient on their chest, and set fire to the end of the blade which will come out, quickly, so that your hand does not burn the person' head; and place a little bit of oil on the mouth.
Then lift up your hand, and go over the fire a few times as you wish to do.
Then place the person' mouth on a cup of salt water and hold it there for an hour, then swallow that water, because the loose tooth is firm and the softened gum is tight and the moistened thing is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the Cauterization of Toothache.
When toothache is from cold or it oozes or bleeds, and do not profit from the cure with medicine, then cauterize that with fire or with cow's milk; or cauterize with fire or with fire.
Cauterization with Cow's Milk is that you take cow' s milk and boil it, and then rub that on the end of the tooth, and wrap it up in cloth, and then pour the boiled milk over that quickly, so that it is warmed.
Then go over that a few times until the power of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
Then if you see, dip wool or a cloth in the cow' s milk and place that on the tooth, and then place fire over that quickly so that it reaches the base of the tooth' s cavity.
However the cauterization with fire is that you take care of the wax or iron, and it is in the middle of something fine and the power of fire does not reach the mouth of the person.
Then set the fire according to its form, and place that on the tooth and if your hand is firm then dip some water a few times because the painful tooth may move or it will be in that day or the next.
And when, by the power of that fire, the person' mouth is filled with cow' s milk and held for an hour, then swallow it; and this is the form of the fire.
Then cauterize according to what you see fit, as it is possible for you to do.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter XXII.
On the Cauterization of an Extrophusis.
When ekstrophy is caused by slimy and cold humors that do not respond to medicines, if you notice a slight improvement in digestion, then use cauterization with the shape of the following: Having two extremities open for the smoke to spread the cauterization on the other extremity, and place it on the area a few times, and if necessary, go deeper into the area until you reach the apex of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then place the cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it on the edge of the wound in order to allow the fire to burn completely.
Then clean it with water and try to dress it and bandage it until it heals.
Chapter .xxiii.
Of cauterization for rawiara, and for contraction of a hernia.
When the moisture comes to the chest, and mostly when it is cold in nature, then at the beginning of using laxative medicines, and then cauterize that which causes pain in the navel in the buried place.
And be careful not to reach the cauterization to the navel or burn with the cord of him, but a little bit.
Then cauterize that which is caused by another cauterization at the junction of the neck at the last vertebrae. The cauterization should be done with a pointed tool following the previous method.
Then clean what is caused by water that came before it heals.
Chapter.xxiiii.
Of cauterization for respiratory distress and coughing.
When coughing and respiratory distress are caused by slimy humors, and the patient does not have a fever or a cold, and it is an old infection, then cauterize that which is caused by two cauterizations on the furcula at the buried places between the ribs; and another cauterization in the middle place of the foot between two breasts; and let the cauterization be done with a sharp tool according to the previous method.
If you wish, it is called "puncta" cauterization, the shape of which you use in the puncturing method for ear pain.
You should make points at those places; and then clean what is caused by water that came before it heals.
And there are three ramps for cauterization, each one is done with a sharp tool according to the following method:
Chapter.xxv.
Of cauterization for titillation, which is the tip of the tongue.
When the tip of the tongue is dislocated by lubricous moisture and does not stop in its usual movement of returning to its place, then at first reduce the dislocation, and then reverse the dislocation from inside out, starting from the base of the tongue; and then raise the cord that is connected to the base of the tongue at the back of the mouth using the fingers of your left hand. If the dislocation is on the side of the tongue, do it with the fingers of your right hand.
Then place two peaks on it; and this is the shape of it:
And then cauterize the cord inside, so that it enters from one side to the other; and this is the figure of cauterization with two peaks:
In some cases, it is adjusted according to the following count, and these are the counts for the cauterization:
Then place a small amount of salt on the cauterized area, and then bind it firmly with a cloth, and do not allow any movement for a while until it feels comfortable.
If the dislocation is on the side of the tongue and it is not fixed yet, then cauterize over the muscle with a sharp tool or a pointed one, as the junction is confirmed and the moisture is sticky, and the hernia is healed.
Chapter.xxvi.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When the stomach has a lot of slimy and sticky moisture that comes out before it is fully digested, and if you continue with your methods of treatment and do not provide relief, then at first, the hernia should be lifted slightly using a cloth; extend its limbs and their movements; and place three peaks on it: one peak should be made by leaving one finger between two fingers, and another two peaks should be placed on either side of those two fingers, forming a triangular shape; and lengthen the areas that are not in place to create a tension.
If the depth of the cut is the same as the thickness of the cord, then
And be this the shape of cauterization according to this method:
And then cauterize the stomach with a sharp tool according to the quantity that you wish to use, and then cauterize that which is caused by punctures; and then clean what is caused by previous treatments before it heals.
Chapter.xxvii.
Of cauterization of the fretty feet.
When there is pain in the feet due to cold, moisture, or strong wind that exceeds their usual tolerance, and if this treatment does not provide relief, then at first, the hernia should be lifted slightly using a cloth; extend its limbs and their movements; and place three peaks on it: one peak should be made by leaving one finger between two fingers, and another two peaks should be placed on either side of those two fingers, forming a triangular shape; and lengthen the areas that are not in place to create a tension.
And be the space between each peak according to the thickness of the finger; and be the cut according to the length of the right hand.
Do not compress it with your hands after the cut.
If the amount of water that is added is more than half of the cord's length, and if it is not properly adjusted; and if the hernia is resting on the feet; and if it is not comfortable, then it should be raised: this will extend its movements, and raise its braces.
And you are able to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery knife, when it is your skill and caution in the art.
And you should be careful not to scorch too much in the cauterization, and that the skin of all the body is preserved so that it is preserved throughout the whole body, because the skin here is thin; and know this.
Chapter .xxviii.
On the piercing of an abscess with a needle, to cauterize.
When a boil erupts on the foot and you want to know if that boil is in the flesh of the foot or in the tunic, then know that if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel great pain and their fever will increase.
And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then the pain is acute and great enough to cause pain to the legs.
So that the patient's neck is turned toward his/her back; then find the place of the boil with your finger, and immediately apply the cautery, which has been made into a thread-like shape, as it was described in the previous page. And cauterize with that and cauterize within so that all the body is heated, within so that it reaches the hip, within so that it burns in the fire, within so that it heals in the skin.
And then heal that with a cure of the other boils within so that they are healed.
And I do not know that of this form of cauterization has only been extended in the art of medicine, and with which many malignant diseases have been known; however, this one is more ardently applied to this operation, but it is better to leave that alone, and instead, the following is done, and it is better.
Chapter.xxix.
On the cauterization of plauresis.
It was said that the small cauterization of the roots of the hair is done according to this way: take a thin, long thread from the hair of the leg, and it is of the thickness of the said thread.
And then immerse that in oil and hold it over the fire, and then cauterize with a small cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the rib cage to the back; and two small cauteries are placed at a little distance from the edge that is left for the beard, and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the navel, declining a little at the edges behind; and one cautery on the stomach, and three cauteries at the edges behind; and one cautery in that place which is between the two ribs, and two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between the two spallas.
And I do not know that you can buy your hand with the cauterization, but rather to make it appear in the form of the body's disease.
And they have also said that some men use a cautery of iron that looks like a ray and burns it; then place that in that place which is between the ribs, so that it reaches the hip, and so that it burns with fire, and in this way as we said in the boil of the foot.
However, in this piercing with a cautery there is no fear, because death so soon happens to the patient in that place where the fistula develops; and it is not healing.
Chapter.XXX.
On the cauterization of the tongue.
When you heal the tongue's malignancy with water as we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize it with three ways, all of which are true: one is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the tongue according to the shape of the feet' cauteries, whose figure has preceded.
And be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little less, and the shape of the cauterization is the same as we said in the foot's cauterization likewise.
And do not buy your hand with the cauterization; and the patient' head is turned toward his/her back.
And there is another way to cauterize, so that you ignite the cautery with two hands, which causes the patient' skin to rise; and lift up the patient' tongue, which is in the patient' mouth, causing it to move to the left or right.
And be your elevation with which you lift up the body according to its length, so that there are equal cauterizations according to the width of the body.
And then immerse both hands into water, lighting a fire in them, and place your hand on which the cauterization will be made according to that part of the body that is opposite it.
And then remove the cautery; and so four cauterizations are done.
And if you want to do it with a single hand, then cauterize with three fingers.
And so you heal the cautery that is in the patient' mouth, because it is easier to heal than the other causes which precede in the cure.
Chapter.XXXI.
On the cauterization of the droop.
There is no cautery in the droop, but only in three things properly.
When you heal the droop with the ways of healing that we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then know that he who cauterizes with four cauterizations around the navel and one on the stomach, one on the foot, one on the tongue, one on the back, and two between the ribs, and one on the right side of the body, and one over the navel, and one over the stomach, and one over the foot, and one over the tongue, and one over the right side of the body, and two between the ribs; and one cautery over the left side of the body, and one over the navel, and one over the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization is proportionate to the thickness of the body.
And then leave the cautery on for a long time that it does not grow cold.
And you do not evacuate the patient' cure with the cautery before it is made with water so that two sentences are added to it, and the third is moved forward with the help of healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized is round according to that part' previous form, and that with which the back is cauterized is also round according to its previous form.
Chapter.XXXII.
On the cauterization of the feet and of the knees.
When the feet are inflamed with the droop and are full of clear water, then cauterize the top part of the foot between the auricular and the ring finger, and raise your hand with the cauterization and do not twist it; and then raise your hand, and do not return it all, for the clear water will cause it to relax.
And this is the form of the cautery: And then place two cauterizations on the knees, and in each knee one cautery at the end of the knife's point. And be the cauterization according to the length of the knee: and on one side of the leg is left off, and on the other side below the middle place of the leg; and on each knee two cauterizations.
And leave the plague open for a long time with your cure, so that no water comes out of it.
And then heal those causes which we have said.
Chapter.XXXIII.
On abdominal cauterization.
When abdominal pain is caused by cold and moisture that affect the muscles, it is the digestive and retentive virtue that is present in the stomach and intestines, and this is cured with certain treatments, and sometimes when the patient suffers from a lack of appetite, they undergo abdominal cauterization; then cauterize according to the following: first, cauterize the entire circle of the abdomen, then four cauterizations around the small intestine, then cauterize the large intestine above the anus, or two cauterizations.
And if the patient suffers from abundant moisture and bears it, then cauterize them over the spine and intestines, and firmly join two cauterizations on the stomach and near the hips, because this is a perfect cure for restoring health, of which there is no other.
Chapter .xxiii.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When there are ancient hemorrhoids or a mass of thick humor or corrupted moisture, and they are cured with water that we have said in the division and not given it its own treatment, then cauterize with three cauterizations on the top of the small bone at the bottom of the navel, and above the navel cut off two strings.
And if you think that the patient's stomach is cold and their food is not digested, and their face is sometimes swollen, then cauterize them on the stomach with a great cauterization according to what preceded; and one cauterization on the back, and another on the patient's hand with a pointed cauterization, and let the cauterization remain for a while, and then cure what is inside.
Chapter  .xxiv.
On the cauterization of aths near the abduction.
When you abduct aths, then place the fire that is gathered on them. Then put that fire in those abducted aths, and finally place their hand within so that the fire reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make it one or two, because if they are three steps, then cauterize each according to what we have said, and then cure them with water that you give them from inside so that they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a great cauterization on the skin, then it is more beneficial for health.
Chapter   .xxv.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the division of the patient' hands.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of water, then heal it with a cauterization.
Therefore, when a fistula is formed in the patient' nature that is ancient and corrupt, and water cures it of lack of appetite, and then give what has been put on the surface with the mentioned tent, and empty the quantity of its depth with the front tent.
Then place the fire that is like a ray. And then put that fired cauterized in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it mixes with the tent.
And repeat over that fire within so that they are burned by those corrupted bodies once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the intestine, then beware of all these places; and do not pass water except when the fistula is in a meat place, and consider that it does not go deeper.
And then heal that place so that it is healed.
And if the place is sealed and separated from the patient's matter, and it has been a long time since it was cut, then you will know that it is completely cured.
And if the patient' matter is not taken from their body, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the edge of their flesh, and comes out through those causes from which there will be a recurrence in its place.
Chapter   .xxvii.
On the cauterization of the nostrils.
When there is pain in the nostrils from cold or strong wind, and because of this the patient' nose bleeds, then cauterize them over the nostrils with a cauterization that causes a recurrence of the memory.
And firmly cauterize it with a small point on the second small bone, so that there will be three linear cauterizations, and then add more behind for good measure.
Chapter    .xxviii.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is pain and soft in the bladder because of cold and moisture, so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize them at the top of the small bone on the bladder, where the bones begin to separate, and cauterize with one cauterization on the right side and another on the left.
And make the length of each cauterization according to the quantity of the patient' pee; and cauterize them with a cauterization at the bottom of the two bones, or with two cauterizations if necessary.
And do a pointed cauterization according to how it is done.
Chapter    .xxix.
On the cauterization of the large intestine.
When there is pain in the large intestine because of cold and moisture, and because of this, pregnancy is prevented, and the woman's periods are delayed, and then when that place causes a feeling of burning within, then cauterize that place with three cauterizations on the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the bladder cauterization; and one cauterization at the top of the two bones, or two cauterizations, and one pointed cauterization.
Chapter    .x.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the tongue.
When there is moist, slippery place on the tongue' side, and it causes a lack of speech from its place, and you notice that the noise is prolonged on the other side when compared to them. And the place of the dislocation is attracted towards the sound.
Then cauterize the patient' tongue at its edge with a ring-shaped cauterization, so that you will not hurt them with the tent in the division of that place when it is rolled over; and so that the edge falls into its normal place.
And do a cauterization according to the form that precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cauterization is not to your liking, then cauterize them with three olive-sized cauterizations.
And do the cauterization according to the quantity of the patient' difficulty; and then heal that place within so that it is healed.
Chapter     .xli.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When there is pain in the tongue' side, and it is caused by cold and moisture, then the patient is cured with water that we have said and do not give it its own treatment, and if it is old, then you will know that it needs to be cauterized; then cauterize them.
And the way of doing this cauterization is according to two ways: or cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize by fire.
The second is to cauterize them on the edge of the tongue with three triangular-shaped cauterizations according to this form; and give each one a good depth. And be the space that there is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of it and if the cautery is small or big.
Some of the points are made on the head of the ankle bone so that there are four points.
And if you want, cauterize the circle that surrounds the shape in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle bone, so that it is a circle that encompasses and burns the sharpness of all the joint.
This is the way to cauterize in the case when pain adheres to the ankle and does not spread within the cavity.
But if it is extended within the cavity, then cauterize that with two points on the cavity at the location where you place the mallet that causes the pain; and one point on the shin bone for four little ones at a time from the front.
And if the cautery is sharp, and be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the sharpness of the joint.
And if the mallet causes that the pain extends to the foot, then cauterize that with three points or four or more if you wish from that point.
And if the mallet causes pain to be on the patient's side when you open the cavity, then cauterize that with a sharp cautery.
And be careful in any cauterization so that you do not burn nerves or large arteries; and by this way the pain is on the mallet badly or contraily.
And you have already seen one of those which I cauterized on the shin bone and finished in the cauterization, and the fire inflates within so that the tumor accomplishes the foot, and pierces and corrupts all the foot. Then a great remedy of the stomach occurred, and death came quickly.
And if the pain is in two parts then cauterize each one according to this way.
And the wise said in the cauterization of the ankle: make a circle of iron, whose circuit is most of a palm; and be it according to the thickness of an apple tree or a little more.
And inside that circle is another third; and be the space between them the quantity of the knot of the foot; and let these circles be open from two sides; and let the length of those cays be one or two knots, and make in those margins of iron well-covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then let it be lit in the fire within so that it burns and sends sparks, and place it on the joint of the ankle, the mallet placed under its sole. And therefore cauterize that with three curved points in one line.
Then let it rest for three days; then apply paste to that with a pad and let the wound pour out for seven days; and then heal that with oil within so that it is cured.
Albucasis says: O, son, of this species of cauterization we have used little for the regard of it, and by this way we have found few that look at it from above.
Or some of the blood cauterizations that suffered it, and turn around to that place.
May cauterization with medicine that you make two circles of iron, pierced in the shape of a keyhole for the lock of it; and be the length of the parts in the thickness of their nails be two knots or three; and let these circles be open from both sides.
And if the space that there is between each one is the quantity of the thickness of it; and be they open from bottom to top, and be they so as to contain themselves within according to this form:
Then place it on the joint of the ankle, the mallet placed under its sole, and compress your hand on the joint of the ankle; then take the water from the tail and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water be with the small fire little by little, and let it be for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the mallet the biting and the pain of it â€“ for that water will cause a great pain in the same way as fire does â€“ until the pain ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off the water from the tail of all the ankle with a wet cloth.
Then let it rest for three days and pause over that border within so that the blackness of the pain remains new, then let it rest for some more days, and run from it the burning water; this is after healing.
Then heal that with oil within so that it is cured.
And if the pain extends within the cavity or the chest, make it so as to contain water according to how it is made in the ankle.
And this is the way of water from the tail, and I have written that in the treatise of the correction of medicines. Take the base of alkali and that of caustic, and separate them into two parts; then make a line between them so that the part of the left is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
Then pause the line of the other wave that is reversed, and let it rest on that alkali and active caustic water from two sources; and let those that are separated by a knot be joined by one knot, and then compress those with your hand well, and let the other wave send down from it the sharp water into the part of the left to the line.
Then adjust all that water, and pour it on another active caustic and on another alkali renewed; because that water, then, makes the other strong, which is administered in small doses of medicine and in the cauterization of the other members, because operation performs fire.
And so from medicines that are used to cauterize the back, in order to remove it quickly and with a mallet, and a sharp caustic applied at the same time; and let those that are mixed be of different colors.
And Gualia related of a man from the country the operation and the cure with which he was healed from the pain of the ankle and the sciatica, and he praised it very much, saying that there is no need for another cure, and because it is cured by one line; as it is strong to make the thread in the bath, and already known from that.
And it should be taken from a certain plant, and if it is not found, then another plant; and one that has been dried recently; and let it be trissated with a little salt and placed on the ankle in which there is pain, or in the cavity, or in the chest, and let it rest.
Then let it be left for three hours or for the quantity that the mallet causes pain to itself; and by this way, let it be cured.
Then place it in the bath again, and when the body of the water is hot, put that in the sun, because the pain ceases and is healed.
And you know that there is no need for any use of cauterization with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
May Escorides also says that when the goat's vein tightens, it is better to use oil; and be the cauterization with this way: take wool and dip it in old oil, then place it between the feet of the foot and between the bones.
Then take dry goat's skin and inflame that with fire within so that it is made of charcoal; then place it on the wool and let it rest until it is dried up. Then repeat that water, and do not cease until the sensation of biting reaches the ankle from within; then let the pain rest.
And this way of cauterizing is called cow's milk cauterization.
Chapter .xii.
On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Parts.
Some kinds of pain in the two parts are due to three causes: by impingement or by injury or by excessive discharge; and for reasons similar to these, by the infusion of dry or rough matter.
And cauterization is performed only in this one kind of case, which is done through the diffusion of dry material.
Therefore, in order to treat the two kinds of pain mentioned above, pills are to be made and placed according to their line of origin; for three lines are to be found, because there is a difference of temperature in each line, and cauterization or treatment must be done in each line according to its quantity, considering the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the substance used.
And let there be made a cauterization with a pointed tool.
If you wish, cauterize three or four times with the hook-shaped cautery according to this form:
Chapter .xliv.
On Cauterization at the Beginning of Gilde.
The following treatment is indicated for children who suffer from gilde: and the beginning of this disease can be recognized in children by the fact that their structure, when touched, becomes rigid and there is a rise in temperature.
And the pain begins in the last vertebra of the back and in the nerves that already begin to extend beyond the other vertebrae.
And so, when you see this and want to stop it, then treat it with cauterization in the form of a circle: so that the cautery takes hold on all sides of the vertebra.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a double line or even a triple line of cauterization. Let the points be placed close to each other.
Then clean the area well with water, which I have previously mentioned.
However, be careful that cauterization is not administered in gilde, which is caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter  .xliv.
On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, when this gout of cold humors is treated with a specific treatment and the pains are not increased, then the following cauterization should be performed:
This is because you treat the evacuation of this joint pain in the circle around the foot with a small number of cauterizations.
And let there be made an olive-shaped cautery, which has this shape:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains increase within the ankle or toward other joints, and this is persistent, then treat it with three or four times of this olive-shaped cautery.
And if these cauterizations that I have mentioned are not enough for you, then treat it with this cautery and do not press too hard on the hand with the cautery before using it, only wrap it around the foot.
And if the pains are persistent within the ankle and in both legs, then treat it with the cauterization mentioned in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is very severe, which is called "gilde," then make points around the fire in this way, as it rotates: make a point on one side of the circle and another on the other side.
And if the pain persists in both legs, then make points around the fire on each nerve and on the edge of the hand.
And if the pain persists in the sides or muscles, then treat all sides with cauterization.
And do not treat the patient without using the right medicines and doing the right thing; because if you do so, there will be fire and no one will help you: God will help those who help themselves.
Chapter .xliv.
On the Cauterization of Breaks.
When there is a break in the armpits and the intestines come out in front of the arm, and it has just started to happen, then treat the patient with food in its own time and with mild treatment so that the break does not spread from the navel.
Then follow the patient between your two hands on his back, and order him to hold his breath in; or if the intestines appear or the bowels move, then treat them.
Then return the patient to the doctor and send him to bed; and if the break happens again, treat it at the top of the spine in the center, where it resembles a half-circle at the base of the neck.
Then light the cauterization, which has this shape:
So that it is lit and the fire is bright and shining. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And you have already made points on the surface of the foot and left them for a while; also, serve those who attend to the patient with sheets and blankets, and others with bedding for the feet, which should be kept clean.
Then place the cauterization on that mark with your hand on the right side, and keep it lit while you hold it; and if you do not get a good grip on the spine at the top of the neck in its center, repeat this treatment on the other side as soon as you can.
And observe carefully the burning of the intestine during cauterization; do not burn it so much that it causes death or other great evil to the patient.
Be aware that if you do not have the bone in place, your operation will be fruitless.
And let the cauterization of children be subtle according to their age and measurement.
Then clean the area of the cauterization for three days, keeping it free from debris so that the fire does not spread.
Then treat those who are ill with water and let them be well.
And the patient should lie down on its back for 10 days, keeping its head still and its neck free from pain.
Then pause the nutrition of the patient according to the length of time for which you treat it; and if the intestine does not burn outside due to the effort made to heal it, then do not give food until it has healed completely.
Then, when you wish to remove the bandages after 10 days, then treat them with a good remedy and keep them for another 10 days.
And let there be work and plenty of food and drink; and let the patient take this remedy with great enthusiasm, for when it is used in this way, there will be healing and no pain.
And show this treatment for breaks in other parts of the belly, and at the beginning, and if it does not work, then treat that break with a double cauterization according to the quantity of the patient; and if it is not adjusted, then treat it with water as mentioned above.
And many have said that the first break should be cauterized with a triangle-shaped cauterization, because it is marked in this way:
And the line that goes up by the height of a finger above the break, and another line downward from it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery above the first line, and the first cauterization is gentler and better.
Chapter .xlvi.
On cauterization for twisting.
When pain in the limbs persists or is caused by impact and does not respond to usual medicine, then it is necessary to apply a pointed cautery.
And the cauterization of each member should be according to its size and fragility, its virtue and depth, and the location of the twisting and pain.
Then if it is healed by the first cauterization, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization, for such pains usually arise from a twisted member at the base of that member near the body, so that with careful cauterization you can achieve healing before the patient dies.
Chapter .xlvii.
On cauterization for leprosy.
LeÙ¾Ø±zy some are healed very well by cauterization, but with moderation if the species of leprosy is caused by decay of flame and melancholy.
And so, when you wish to cauterize that, consider whether the leprosy is severe or not, and apply the water as described in the division, and do not hesitate, nor does it matter, about the patient's head, which may be infected from the top of the skull, and the second place behind the ears, towards the front of the hairline; and both on two sides; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And finally, your hand in the cauterization, a little inside the bone, to exert a slight pressure, and the scales are displaced, so that the exhale of thick vapors is eased; and cauterize on the skin according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the whole body and manifestly appears, then you should cauterize that with those cauterizations described in the head; and one on the tip of the nose, and two on the cheekbones, and two on the neck near the Adam's apple, and one at the base of the tongue, and two on the tonsils, and one on each tonsil, and two on the jawbones and one on each jaw, and two on the shoulder blades, and one on the breastbone, and two on the ribcage near the armpits, and one on the side of the ribs, and two on the hips, and two on the thighs, and one on the tip of each big toe, and two on the ends of the feet, and one under each foot.
And be careful with the nerves that are above the skin, so you don't burn them.
Some are cauterized with one cautery on the bones of the hand and another on the mouth of the stomach, and one on the navel.
And you should know that the more careful you are with the cauterization, the better it will heal and the more beneficial it will be; and you should know that there is no pain in cauterizing the body, but only when there are small vessels, because the patient' body is already stunned.
Then the cauterizations should be large or small according to the members and joints, depending on whether it is preceded by the virtues of the instruments.
Then apply a paste of ash with milk or mead for cauterization, or another cure within that it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
On cauterization for stupor.
When a member is staggered or asleep and does not respond to medicine, oils, and plasters, then you should cauterize that members according to the size of the member or its fragility.
And let the small cauterization enter the depth of the wound a little. Then apply oil or balm within that it is healed.
Some are cauterized with the stupor that persists in the limbs and neck, and the nerves that move those limbs, and the stupor remains.
You should not proceed with this unless you are aware of the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the body.
Chapter .xlix.
On cauterization for morphed bruises.
When an old bruise is resistant to usual medicine, then you should apply a small cauterization on it according to the depth of the bruise, so that the whiteness and color of it are changed, and the color of it is altered.
Then apply a paste of ash with mead and rye flour, rose leaves, and stinging nettle, or the water of a Columbine or Yellowwort, each in parts, mixed together, and return it to the wound after making a bandage over the area, so that it is healed.
Chapter .1
On cauterization for cranky patients.
When the patient is getting angry and you want to calm them down, then apply a circular cauterization around their body as they turn, so that they are calmed.
The wise ones said that it should be cauterized in the same place, but I have not seen that, because I believe it is ulcerated, and I have seen that happen a few times.
It is better to cauterize in the order described above, or with many cauterizations.
Chapter .1
On cauterization for those who are fat.
When a fatty person is delayed in maturation, either because they are too young or old, and their fat is growing too fast, then apply a small number of cauterizations around their body. And leave it alone, as it will mature faster without intervention.
But if you wish to pierce them with a cauterization, then apply the cauterization in the form described above; and return it to the same place, so that it enters the wound.
And if the cauterization in that place is left alone, so that the center of the arm is eased; then apply oil within that it is healed.
Chapter  .2
On cauterization for those who are corrosive.
Corrodent is walking corruption in the limbs, which corrupts them as if they were eating dry wood with fire.
Then if that corrosive person is in a place where cauterization with fire can help, then apply small clovers of cauterization, and large according to the place where it is corrosive.
Then apply cauterization entirely, so that you eliminate all corruption and do not harm anything else.
Then leave it alone for three days, and apply oil mixed with the ashes within that all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is gone.
Then apply oils or balms within that it generates flesh.
But if it is not corrupted, then apply cauterization again over the area that is still corrupt, within that it heals properly.
Corrodent can be treated some times with acute medicine, because that is half a treatment instead of cauterization. But applying cauterization with fire may heal much better.
I have already described the cure for them with acute medicine in the division; and now take that when you need it.
Chapter   .3
On cauterization for clauds and other similar cases.
Some cases are caused by a large opening at the base of the neck, which dislocates the neck, and cauterization should be done with two methods, first with fire and second with water.
Make the cauterization with fire that is ignited so it looks like a ball of smoke, which should be made of iron according to the quantity which holds the claw of all parts together and also have narrow margins.
Then place that ignite on the claw and roll your hand with the cauterization in the direction of the claw until the cauterization reaches the depth of the claw. Then let it rest for three days before you start to blister. And apply that with dried herbs of thistle torn into three pieces soaked in salt, and let the paste stay on it for a night, because the herb will dry out its roots.
Then heal the area with a ointment made of natural substances until it is healed.
And if it doesn't turn silver or has a few spots of blood on it, and you notice that some of the hair has fallen out in the area, then apply an ointment made with water to that spot; but prepare a small amount of water from the herb and place it on the claw; then squeeze a little bit of the water onto the palm of your hand, and roll your hand with the compress to the base of the claw, pressing the margin of the canal into the root of the claw, and let the water drip away towards the knuckle of the root of the claw; and wait for the patient to feel a little pain from the water dripping for an hour, then apply that again, because the claw has its roots infected.
Then do the same to the other one until you have covered all of them on the body.
Then heal those pustules that the roots of the claws are eradicated with water from the ointments that the flesh produces.
Chapter III.
On Trembling Cauterization.
When there is a trembling due to friction in the nerves or from fever caused by rubbing or another similar cause, then you should cauterize that with four different cauterizations or five on each side, one cauterization between each spine on the feet, and one cauterization on the toes, and one on the navel, and one on the chest, and one olive-shaped.
Then the trembling of the patient will subside, and the feverishness of the infection will decrease.
Chapter LV.
On Cauterization for Accidental Wounds on the Body.
When there is a sudden outbreak of white rash on the body, and pus-filled blisters are formed from the thick corrupt matter; then at the beginning when it first appears, that should be cauterized thoroughly with a sharp blade of fire; or with a long hair; or with slow-moving cauterization.
And some blisters should be broken at the beginning of their appearance according to this method; and they shouldn't be crusted over, and the excess fluid should be let out by breaking them, and that will heal from them.
However, if water is made to flow onto it with bloodletting.
Chapter LVI.
On Cauterization of the Flow of Blood in an Accident Due to a Wound Caused by Iron.
Then if there is a flow of blood caused by an iron wound, and the wound quickly bleeds, you should cauterize that with water or fire or iron, and only for one hour; and if it keeps bleeding, you should do it again for another hour.
Then when there is a little bit of blood, roll your hand over the wound with your thumb at the opening of it, and place that above the wound so that the blood drips away from the knuckle; and let that not stick to it.
Then place a few large and small olive-shaped cauterizations on it, and blow out over them until they are ignited.
Then take one that is small or large according to the place and vessel in which the artery has broken, quickly before you stop bleeding, and cauterize that within the heart until it is sealed up; and do not let the blood run.
And if the blood leaves the opening of the artery as you continue to roll up your hand and blow out the cauterization, then take another cauterization with a blade carefully; and once the blood is stopped, do not let go of that cauterization.
And be careful that you don't burn the nerve here, and that it doesn't spread to the patient's back or some other evil.
And know that when the artery bleeds, it is not possible to stop the blood flow in such a case, and most importantly when the artery is large, if it isn' t stopped with one of these four methods: or cauterize it where it breaks, or extract it when you should extract it, because when you extract its ends, both extremities burn and the blood is stopped, or that it be held with a ligature very tightly, or that it be bound to the pulse with a bandage.
Then whoever performs the extraction should hold it tightly with his hand and bind it very tightly with a bandage or by its position or by causes burning and similar, but not much.
And if there is a little bit of blood here and not the medicine or present remedy, then open the heart's opening with a blade where the blood has broken, and understand that the great constriction of the vessel in which the blood breaks, and over the artery the hand should not be stopped; and pour cold water on it from a high place so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and also apply cauterization or medicine as necessary.
On Wounds, Incisions, and Wind, Bloodletting, Plagues, and Their Similarities.
We have spoken in the first chapter about all the diseases that are suitable for cauterization with fire and medicine, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary to them; and we have ordered the chapters of the subtitle of the head within the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that order for them, so that it is useful to those who seek it; then on it that you have demanded.
Before I begin here, know that in this chapter it is for the sake of those who fear; and before I start in the first chapter on cauterization, know that
And for the sake of those who are cautious, because in the operation described in this chapter there are sudden eruptions that are like blood flowing from a vessel or an incision on an abscess or the extraction of pus or the piercing of a wound or the incision of a stone; and their similarities. And of all these there accompanied fear and trembling, and in the most of them death.
And I tell you that above you shall not fall this water, for some of the diseases that come upon men are bad and deadly. And some of them leave their disease and die quickly because of the violence of this water that finds its disease, and because of the length of their illness, and because of the meaning of their disease, which means death.
And of those is one that gives you hope and promises you health, but your illness is destructive.
And do not consent that he who comes to you in this way should be the one; and your prudence be greater than your suspicion and your avarice; and do not suppose any reason for him except a certain knowledge which certifies that it is right for you, and to whom success is laudable.
And in the treatment of all your diseases use prediction and indication of him to whom salvation is given, for in him are helpers in obtaining fame and memory, praise and glory.
O son, God inspires you with his understanding and does not leave your direction and protection, for he is in his might.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing according to chapters as it precedes in the chapter of cauterization, of the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be helpful for you from this and for which you needed it.
Chapter 1.
Of water that is contained in the head of children.
Do you know that this disease, which causes bad breath in children, appears during childbirth and when the newborn's head is lifted up.
And some are caused by hidden cause, which is not recognized.
I have not seen this disease except in children; and in all those that I saw die, it was because of them. And for this reason, I have seen the work of death in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head remained constantly increased in size until it could not fit into the fire that killed him.
And this moisture is added between the nose and the ear, or it is added above the ear on top of the skull.
For the operation in this case, if the moisture is between the nose and the ear, and the pus is little, then you should cut into your own place in the head with a scalpel on its edge, so that it runs out two points within, where the moisture flows, and this is the shape of the spike:
And if the moisture is increased more, and the pus is greater, then there are two fissures according to this way:
And if the moisture is above the ear, then the sign of it is that you open the corners of the head completely and squeeze the water out when you press them with your hand from within, and there is no water that comes out to the outside. Then cut into the middle of the head according to this way:
And cut out all the moisture; and strengthen the fissures with gauze and plasters; and pour oil from above on it for five days, then remove the plaster and cure the plague with potions and poultices, and strengthen the head with equality; and eat dry food that has little moisture within so that the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of cutting, which you consider, is to take into account the size of the pus and the accumulation of water; for some are larger in the back of the head, or on the front, or on the right, or on the left; so take care when making the incision where the pus appears and the water collects, and cut as best you can.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood from the head because of the movement of water.
Chapter 2.
When an animal has a cough or a fever in the chest or feet, and it does not respond to medicines, then the last cure is to cut into those two arteries.
And then, when you want to cut the arteries of the head, and rub the area with rough gauze so that the veins appear, and strengthen the neck of the animal with some gauze; and consider where the vein runs; and the places on each side of the ears are muffled, and are hidden in some people.
And then try to strangle the animal, and cut each one with a spike on each side coming from above towards the ear, and it is as long as the skull's edge.
And if you want to, insert the spike below the artery and cut it from above where the incision is made on each side.
And the length of the incision is two points apart, for when a vein is cut, the pulse stops beating suddenly and often.
And if the artery does not appear in the feeling, then you should measure the quantity of space between three fingers, and try it, and cut inside the bone.
And this is the quantity that comes from a vein: one fifth. and is firm in the hand when it comes from a strong vein, and all of it is according to the quantity that appears from the goodness of the animal and from the accumulation of its artery.
And then consider the plague, and if there is any cause of the skull, cut it out to prevent the appearance of a pus.
And then strengthen the plague with gauze and plaster of Paris, and then cure it with poultices within so that it is healed.
Chapter 3.
Of cutting the arteries that are in the temples.
When an animal has a headache, or a fever, or a bad smell due to the moisture of food and its quality in the temple, or because it is violent and similar to those, and you do not treat it with medicines, then we will turn our attention to these diseases by cutting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the way of performing this operation and extraction is that the animal rubs the hair in the temple, for it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden in a few people because of its speed.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the animal be strengthened with some gauze; and rub the area with rough gauze or evaporate it with water so that the vein appears clearly to you. Then you take the spike, which is this form: And then you open the nose with ease until you reach the artery; and cut it out separately from each side, cutting from above, and not cutting between them; and remove those of the nose, and discover those of the tunic, which are hidden there completely.
And if the artery is small, wrap it at its end with a thread, and cut one of them from that side according to the quantity by which the two extremities are lengthened and shortened, and do not cut the flow of blood, for if they are not cut, then the blood does not come out.
And then remove the blood from his hand. Enter three times.
And if the hernia is large, then place two strong cords of linen or rope around it before removing it from in front of the plaster so that there is no pus, and prevent the flow of blood by stopping up the hole with a plug until the plaster hardens and the wound heals over.
Then cut off the excess skin between the two ligaments, and do so at that time or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize the skin with a cautery knife before cutting it off, and place it in the position where that work will be done.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or a cold complex; for cauterization helps to dry out the moisture, and so is better in this case.
Then remove the hernias by cutting off the place where they are attached to the skin, and put a thin layer of powder on them, and apply dry medicines so that the flesh heals and the blood stops flowing into it as quickly as possible.
And if while you are operating another hernia opens up and there is a flow of blood from it, then you should stop the bleeding by tightening that place or by cauterizing it, or by putting pressure on the place where the hernia was, and strengthen your hand so that the bleeding stops. And if for some reason those things are not present with you, then stop the bleeding by putting pressure on the wound, and put the wound under cold water, and continue to apply pressure until the bleeding stops again, and then strengthen your hand.
And that the pus comes out with the removal of the hernia is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery knife having two handles, because you have stretched the two places to each other, and stop for a moment, and light it up, so that it reaches to the bone and cuts it into two places, so that it can be elongated from between the extremities of it, since it is not yet consolidated by this cautery.
This is the form of the cautery:
And so the sharpness of the two blades is equal. But if there are less sharp edges that two blades, since if they are very sharp, then the flesh will be cut quickly by each of them, and will not be cut as much by both at once, so that it is better to use two sharp things.
So that if there is any thickness in it, the heat of the fire should be kept on it, and the flesh is separated from it easily.
This work is better for all kinds of work and lighter operations.
And the space between the two blades should be the quantity of the thickness of the knife.
I have understood.
Of the treatment for acute and sour pains in the joints.
When the acute and sour pains are in the joints, and those veins that run along the top of the head give you no reason for medical treatment, and sometimes your face becomes red and you feel as if it is crawling with ants, and the patient's joints ache so much that their hair falls out, and the eyelids are burned by the sharpness of the tears, and the medicine for this operation gives them a refreshing sensation, and they do not want to take it again.
And that you order the servant to shave the hair from the patient' head, and make three incisions in the forehead, each one with a different distance according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is divided into two parts: the first incision should be at the same distance as the nose is from the middle of the forehead, and the second should be a little shorter than the length of the eyelids, and the third on the other side.
And keep away from the incisions for hernias that are in two places, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of the two jaws. And if the space between each incision is a third of a inch wide.
And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth ready to stop the bleeding quickly.
And then put between two acute extremes, whose form this is the shape of the incision for him: which is the division of the temples to the second incision. Examine carefully the whole bone that is between two incisions to find the place where it is best to make the middle incision, and then make this incision just before the second incision. And then put this sponge into the first incision again and a knife from one side to the other is not sharp.
And put pressure on that place with the sponge as long as the flesh is attached to the bone, and use the knife to cut off the bone from one side to the other, and then use it to open up the middle incision, and cut all the vessels that go down from the head into the arms.
But if the incision continues beyond the bone, and then make it in the middle of the incision again before cutting to the other side.
And then take a little amount of blood from each place where the flesh has been cut off, and press it together.
And then put a little piece of old linen or cloth in each incision, and press it down on the powder that is in there with the water and oil and vinegar, and see if any pus comes out without causing bleeding.
And on the third day, cut off the ligature and administer a large infusion of cold water or vinegar, and then cure it with a strong ointment made with oil of roses and other drugs so that the wounds are healed.
I have understood.
Of the treatment for headaches by catharsis and for the arms that descend from the inner parts of the head.
When blood flows strongly and continually, and sometimes the patient' arms are very tired because of their small size, and his eyelids are swollen and irritated, and in the front of the head there is a sharp pain that feels like burning and an extrusion of matter, then you know for sure that these things do not come from the blood vessels, but from the inner parts of the head.
And the best treatment for this is: order the servant to shave the forehead, and make a incision in the middle of the forehead, a little shorter than the width of an inch (and start the incision at the same place as the temple incisions, and then cut through the bone, and lengthen your hand from the jawbones), and open up the bone that is exposed.
Dry all the blood completely with sponge or cloth, and then put pressure on it between the two lips of the incision with old linen or cloth, and then close up the incision with a strong ointment. And then clean carefully above it with powder that is in there with water and oil so that no pus comes out without causing bleeding.
And when the blood has stopped flowing and you can see that the pus is decreasing, then you know for sure that the bone is beginning to form new flesh, and then cure it with a strong ointment made of two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, and make a paste of it, and administer it to these wounds so that the new flesh grows.
I have understood.
Of the treatment for water in the ears.
Any cause of water in the ears is one of four things: either it is mineral water or similar to it, which causes a feeling like pain, or it is due to plants, which are similar to mustard and fava beans, or it is a fluid-like thing, such as water and vinegar, and their similar things, or some animal.
Here is the translation of the text line by line: Then place some cloth or wool around the patient's ear, and spread their ear open at the tip as much as possible, for it is often due to a wax build-up.
If not, then administer an extract with the instrument called gentle sublingual epiceratic which this is the form:
And if it is due to a wax build-up with the epiceratic, it is fine; but if not, then administer the extract with a little bit of water in a double-boiled mixture.
And if it is not due to water, then make a tube out of wire and insert the tip into the ear canal and pack it with wax and soft oil so that it doesn't leak out through the tube. Then extract it with strong suction, for three times as much water has been reported to come out with it.
But if it is not due to a wax build-up in this manner, then take some alum or fine dust and put a little quantity on the tip of a tweezers, and pause it against the ear canal, and gently wrap it around the tip. Then insert it into the ear canal with ease, then dry the ear with a cloth.
And if it is not due to any of the usual causes that we have mentioned, then you shall cut and clean out the ear from in front that might be causing a plug or spasm.
And the manner of cutting out that is that you shall start by sealing off the vein with your finger and then extract it in the second manner, according to the virtue of water, and pause the ear open at its tip, and apply the blood of the patient onto the opening, and then make a small cut in the ear rim, pouring water into the ear. And if the opening takes on the shape of a moon, and pain results from it, then stop that with an appropriate instrument; and sew up the opening in a hurry, and cure what is inside so that it heals.
And if the cause enters into the ear is one of the fats that are created and puffs up, then administer cure and extract it. But if you do not obey my orders and instead take a little bit of the fluid, then take some fine alum according to this form: Then administer the extraction of that fat that has entered into the ear.
And do not give water when you think that the ear is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in some cloth or wool, and extract it with a little bit of water or with gentle subduction, or cut it open as described above, for it is a relief to extract it.
But in the water that has entered into the ear, there is such a thing as using sneezing as a remedy at the beginning, and filling their own ear with a little bit of wool, and shaking it over that ear, and if it is due to a sneezing attack, then it is fine; but if not, then take three small peals of pepper and place them in the fire a little, and place those in the fire a little, and when they are hot, have the patient insert one into their own ear canal, and jump over that ear with another peal of pepper. Then stop water from entering until all the water is gone.
Then stop water from entering until all the water is gone. And then the water has been completely removed, you may take some paper or a thin cloth. and place one end into the ear and spread the other end towards the fire until it is burned up.
Then place another thin cloth and pour water over it until all the water has been removed, and then insert the tube with wax as mentioned above.
But if the cause of entering into that ear is an animal (such as a fly or worm) which has entered into the ear, then extract it with gentle subduction and a small incision, and the cause of it is easier to deal with than all the other causes that enter into the ear.
But if the cause of entering into that ear is an animal which has been born in the ear, and you do not follow my instructions to clean out the ear with water, then pause it towards the sun.
And if there is any cause of the worms, then extract it with gentle subduction or a small incision, but if there is no cause, then take a thin tube from which this is the form: Then insert the thin end into the ear according to the quantity that it suffers, and then suck it out strongly, and make water appear as drops, until all the worms are gone.
But if you do not obey my instructions regarding cleaning, then twist and wrap the tube around the ear according to what has been said above; then administer the distillation that has already been prepared for the cure of worms, and observe water in the distillation treatment.
And be your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose form is as follows: Then make it of silver or brass, thin, and in its tip, a small opening, and on top of it.
And so it is used as a plug to stop up the cavity of the tube where necessary. And if you wish, take the end and wrap it around with a cloth, and pour some oil into the cavity of the ear, or some extract from a herb, or water that you wish to be extracted in the cavityâ€”and this is in the earâ€”, and then insert the end and squeeze your hand gently onto it so that the oil goes inside.
And water which has been put into the ear is already scorched by the fire a little bit. And be careful that the cause you are distilling in the ear is not too sharp, for ear medicines do not suffer water.
Chapter VII
On Ear Diseases Caused by Opilities
Some children are born with an opility in the ear due to a birth defect or meat that has not been properly cooked before eating, and this causes pain in the ear; and sometimes this opility occurs at the tip of the ear, which does not separate the ear from the head, and sometimes it occurs on the sides.
That which occurs in the tip of the ear, which does not separate the ear from the head, is in difficult cases of treatment.
And in that which occurs on the sides, pause the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it. And so if there is an abundant substance, open it with a fine spatula whose form is like this:
If the extremity of the foot in which the width is small, and one side is acute and the other not; and the spatula is of two lengths so that it does not hurt the auricle.
And so if the opulence is hidden by flesh in the ear or meat of the foot, then you should cut with a sharp and gentle incision within which all the flesh is exposed.
And if there is an opulence in the preon of the ear, then you should take with a sharp spatula and scratch it lightly; then put that on the meat of the ear.
And so if you smell an abundance of liquid that the patient is attracted to with ease, due to gravity; try this with ease and do not hurt the nerves of the ear.
And so pause the ear with a second quantity of the thick liquid that you wrapped in egg yolk from Egypt; and do this for several days until you are sure that the abscess is healed; or take some and put it into a cup and spray it on three sides, and use it; and if the ear has already become pustular, then you should change the water and put the liquid onto another part which you will wrap in cerosides, which are made from egg yolks, so that the abscess will drain; and properly care for that until it heals.
But if there is a flow of blood, then you should soak a sponge or cloth in water and place it on the ear; and use another cure which constricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Of the treatment for an aching ear that has been pricked with an awl and is bleeding.
Aches from pokes with an awl into the eyelids have some small drops of water on them; some drops are dry.
Then cover those that have thick or sharp edges, and scratch them with a fine spatula, and place them on three sides of the area.
But if there is pain from blood flowing out, then you should cauterize those with a fine, pointed cautery.
And the best cauterization is to return the scalp and leave it in place when there is any cause for the razor's teeth; and when they are cauterized with fire, those teeth are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for a large sore on the eyelids of the eyes.
Small sores in the eyelids of the eyes have some cause which is gathered together with great strength and toughness, and thus it grows larger; and this type of sore is called "gout".
It is an addition of thick moisture on the lower eyelid and a drying out on the upper lid.
Then the operation should be that you consider if the larger part is done by itself in that which is apart from the eyelid, and it is applied entirely; and the cause of this is removed easily.
Then begin by making a small incision along the width, and carefully remove it with a pointed instrument within which all the excess is removed; then put that back together with a little glue and apply pressure to it.
And if the shape is large, you should adjust it with sutures; and properly care for it until it is healed.
And if it is little, you will not be able to do much for that sore, but the blood from it will restore and heal itself.
And if the larger one is declining into the inner part of the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and put that larger part back together with a little glue, so as not to make an incision; and press it down completely; and if the eyelid needs to be cut in order to open it wider, then do not matter if there is any cause for that.
Then make the incision, wash the eye with salty water; and properly care for the area until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the treatment for a sore on the upper eyelid of the eye.
It is a condition which develops in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and most often it affects children, making them cry because their tears run down; and they cannot see clearly because of the tears.
And so you have to work constantly on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their eyes open; and the eyebrows that are moistened by their tears, which have already covered a swelling, and the proximity of an ache seems to be in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel an ache within it.
And there is no way to operate on the eye itself while it is still attached to the socket; and then pause the eye with a cloth and press it down; and cut out some of its circle according to the quantity that contains arnica in all parts, and then place it back onto the eye; and press it down completely so that an ache is felt within half of its circle, and then open it halfway with a sharp spatula inserted into a small incision along the width; and do not let the incision be larger than this.
But in the preon, cover that you make a small incision completely within which you can reach an ache, for it is through a tiny opening that you feel an ache according to the shape of white grit;
Then remove that with a cloth which you have wrapped between the fingers of your left and right hands, moving it from side to side until it is torn.
And make sure not to press on the incision in order that the spatula does not reach the eye and it does not hurt.
But if you do not feel an ache at the beginning of the incision, rather than pressing on it a small instrument within which arnica is contained; then remove that with ease as described above; and then wash it with water and sand; and place the cloth back onto the area and cover it with powder.
And then if they grind salt and pour it on the incision, so that the water from that is removed;
Then properly care for it until it is healed.
But if an abscess develops in the area, then treat that with poultices of white of egg until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of ways to touch the eye.
When the eyelids of the eyes are natural and old, then remove those with a sharp instrument from their natural roots; and make ways to cause harm as follows: by cauterizing with fire; or with acute medicine as described in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by cutting with an incision and suturing; or by using canes according to what has been said above.
And so if you pause the top of the eye with your left hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your right hand, and if it is turned, then let it be; and if not, insert a needle into that which is attached to the eyelid, and make the needle go through that part close to the eyelid, and pull the thread back onto the eyelid, and turn it with your left hand.
And then put the thread into the inner part of the eyelid; let the hair be adjusted with a sharp scissor on the edge of the lacrimal major, into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the thread; pause for a moment, and then apply a small cotton or cloth bandage to the eyelid, and then cut off the excess, so that it does not become tangled. And then, put a little figure of a sheet of mint on the edge of the lid.
But may I say that the figure is according to the quantity of protraction of the eyelid; for it is different in men, because those who are inclined to have a large amount of protraction of the eyelid, and this makes them uncomfortable, that the edge is cut with a sharp scissor, but not much.
Then put the thread on the two lines you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor. And if your edge is near the natural hair, as it is with the thickness of the king.
And then put a thread in one of the two angles of the eye; and then scrape all of it, and then adjust the cut with the thread between the two lips or fine yarn, and rinse it off, and then attach what is superfluous to the eyebrows on both sides for some vague reasons, if you want to do so, and otherwise, do not worry about it.
Then leave the suture of the yarn inside for three days or four, and then take care of it.
And if you want to, leave the suture of the edge alone, and take care of it with water that dries up and tightens, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the edge and the addition of it; but the suture is better done so I say the ancient methods of taxanir.
But may I say that it is solicited on the patient's leg; and this is a good operation, and not in fear.
And this is another way to do so, and it is that you place on the eyelid a figure like a sheet of mint, and then raise the eyelid with three small nails separated and grouped according to this form:
If this is not possible there, have nails, and if it does not close properly, then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and then introduce another yarn next to the lacrimal major, and the yarn according to the position of the lacrimal minor, and adjust the threads between the teeth with equality, and then raise your hand over it with elevation of the edge, lift all the eyelid up on which is marked this way as well as we have described.
Then adjust the two edges of the lid with suture, and take care inside that it is healed.
But if an inflammation occurs due to your cutting or edge, let this inflammation be with wax and similar, and wet it.
And in some cases, the hair of the eyelid are converted, so it is good to use wax for that, which we have mentioned for cutting; but the suture is more artificial.
Taxanir with canes is according to this form: And you convert the eyelid and cut the figure inside according to what I have described; then, with art, make two thin canes or two thin rods of the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the thickness of the edge. You have already cut the ends of some parts, where you have the threads.
Then add some of the thin canes to those parts that are too big; and tighten them very well, and then leave them for a few days, because the edge will die and rot if it does not close properly.
But if it is delayed, then break it with a sharp tool, and then take care of the edge inside that it is healed.
Therefore, when it is fixed, the eyelid is raised, and the hair do not poke.
This is the form of two canes that you will make according to this form: neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
Of raising hair on the edge with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hair is not natural, hard and sharp, the operation in the eye is that you take a very thin needle and pause it on the edge of the hair, and then place the tip of a very fine silk thread or leather on it, and then adjust the ends well so that no one notices it. The length of the yarn should be about a palm's length.
Then you will make another very thin thread from it, and then cut the ends of it if you want to.
Then place the patient' s head in the middle of the needle, and be close to the hairline so that your work is noticed, because it is a subtle and small operation.
Then insert the needle into the root of the hair, pushing it well, and then make it enter quickly into the eyelid through that from which it has come out from the natural hair.
Then pull the hair inwards and insert it into the thread, and the hair should be one or two or three or more.
Then pull your hand over that from which the hair has come out into the thread, and then place it on the eyelid with the hair.
But if it is pulled out of the thread and not from the hair, then you will pull out the thread from the edges with the nail that you have placed on it, within which the hair has come out.
Then break it with the vision of the hair, because you will pull out the thread and the nail, and then cut each part with a sharp scissor and leave them for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows on it.
If the hair is too long, then you adjust a very long hair from the natural hair, and it is raised with it, or that you place it within which is to be expanded; then raise it.
Chapter 13.
Of the treatment of inflammation in the eyelid above.
When inflammation appears in the edge, and it is drawn up on the eyelid, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of the edge or section or cauterization, and this is called leporine, and that is either natural or accidental, and is done by bad consolidation of the edge or section or cauterization, or by similar things.
The way of the operation in the eye is that you separate that consolidation and open those lips with a cloth, and then put it inside which are cured.
And I do not say that you use of the treatment of the eye for those causes that dry up and tighten it; because if you make it return to inflammation, there is more harm than good while it is wet.
Use on the eye for those causes that soften it with fenugrec, and dip in water in which are eggs of olive oil and a few drops of lemon juice, or dip in that oil made from some oils, and then apply to the eye; take care to make it wet, and then take care.
The treasure of your treatment is that you perform all the things that do not consolidate according to the form that begins with an "e".
And this operation that we have described is not other than a correction of inflammation that does not return to the form of the place according to what it begins.
Chapter 14.
From the cure of people who suffer from a sore on their eyelids.
This "remedy" that is made on the eyelid, which is called in truth a remedy; and it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
Accidental is made by plague or by wound or by cautery or by other appearances.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle and make it double threaded, and stick it in the flesh, and let it pass from the lacrimal of the left within to the lacrimal of the right, so that the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
Then remove the meat from its connection by the needle and cut it off with a sharp knife. And then if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good; and if not, take the thread and tie it to the divided part, and at that turn the eyelid, and make the two wounds in the lid of the left.
And the two extremities of the two wounds are made at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and may be made in a figure with those two angles.
This shape is a Greek letter: Lambda.
Then remove the flesh there by the amount that is the width of it taken from the left side of it, which cuts the eyelid.
Then join the separated parts and sew them with woolen thread; and then treat those with water that I have said of the medicinal substances and with heat so that it is cured.
And if the "remedy" in this place is by a wound or suture or cauterization, then you should make a flat wound on the skin of the eyelid according to what comes before. Then separate by the heat between two lips according to what I have said.
In the sum of the speech of the cure of  "remedies" when it is above or below, which runs in its operation, according to what is prepared in the form of  "remedy", and that is in a shape of diverse colors.
And the artisan knows at all times how to prepare in any way that is possible for him so that it returns the figure to its natural form, or similar to it, and that patient according to what he wants from the operation and of the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men that it is fixed the eyelid pus above the album of the eye, and is forbidden by the ease of movement and of its natural works, then you should stick the end of the needle in the left eyelid, and lift it up, or extend it with oil.
Then you should cut the adhesion with a sharp knife, which is not on the sharpness of the wounds, having obtuse a little so that the patient does not disturb the operation, and leave the knife that does not hurt the eye in its sharpness.
And may be your incision that it is taken away this adhesion with ease so that it is returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that it is cured all the adhesion.
Then you should put in the eye salty water with which you wash; or distill in it of Zuny dissolving in water.
Then join between the eyelid and the eye with a calga of it, and place on the eye wool infused in the album of wine, and then third day use causes of consolidation so that it is cured.
Chapter 16.
Of incision of the eyelid and of eminence of flesh of the lacrimal.
You should know that the eyelid is according to two ways: either it is nervous, and is similar to hard cyphers subtle; or it is not nervous, similar to frozen white moisture, which when it touches the touch, or it is forced to take on a thread, is separated, and the thread does not stick to it.
And both spices do not begin except from the lacrimal major that goes little by little so that it covers the sight and prevents the light and movement of flesh.
And the way of the work in the incision is that the patient stops his head in the left side, and then opens the eyelids, and raises the eyelid to your hand, and then collect the eyelid with a thread of few double threads, and extend it to the divisions on the right. Then take a needle and stick it in that one hair of horse or cow or of water, or of appearances, or of faith strong, or double the end of the needle little by little and let it remain in the middle of the eyelid, and then push that hair with the needle, and cut it off at the base of the eyelid; and then extend it to the divisions on the right, and cut them off. Then you should follow that hair in that place within the back of it.
Then you should cut the root of the eyelid with a sharp knife or with small scissors, and let the flesh of the natural eyelid flow so that by cutting it does not run continuously.
And some times the eyelid is stretched on the stone oil or on faith strong, according to what I have said, and then is cut with a sharp knife of lion's hair, of which this is the form.
And take care that at the knife do not touch the corneal layer and that it does not break in its opening, and that the pupil is pierced.
Then incision goes into the eye a little salt of Zuny or strong water, and leave it within another day; and then treat that with water so that it is cured.
And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot stick the needle, or it does not remain in that hair, then this kind of eyelid is cured with medicine, and is healed so that it is cut by eye and recommended in the division.
And if you want to cut that hair, then open the eye of the patient and take a sharp knife of lion' hair according to this form: with subtlety. And if times that hair is rarefied and is fixed and stuck in the root of it, then distill from it water strong enough or salt of Zuny, and leave the eye within another day.
Then repeat the operation on that so that all what is of it returns to him, but if not, then stop that hair, for you leave that in place, and at the beginning treat the aphorism with medicine so that it is cured.
Then repeat your operation on that according to what is needed so that it is cured.
The eminence of the eyelid, if it is seen in the eye by great harm, should be suspended with a thread, and cut that hair from one side, and do not finish the incision so that the flow of tears does not stop.
Then distill in the lacrimal strong water within another day so that it is cured.
Chapter 17.
Of incision of algaziolic and of water that is born from flesh joined in the eye.
Some times in the eye whites is born flesh of prayer, and it is overlaid within that covers the pupil, or approaches or recedes on the eyelids so that they meet together and are joined to each other at the base of the eyes like a pillar.
And the operation in it is that the patient stops his head in the left side, and then opens the eyelids so that all of it returns to him, but if not, then stop that hair, for you leave that in place, and at the beginning treat the whole with medicine so that it is cured. And take care from the eye of what is needed for it to be finished according to the incision, and hold fast to the hair of that eye that does not hurt.
And be your incisions the one which you will inscribe those or at the spetum that we have recalled in the incision of the fingernail, or to small pincers that it is gathered ascebel according to which will come the form of him near this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is finished and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wound with salt water trended or distilled in him powder similar to the medicine of the corrosive, and place over the wound a little cloth white within that it is secured from an apoplexy cautery.
And if there is any cause of an apoplexy and he is torn out cauterization, and you fear an apoplexy cautery, then leave the wound and cure that apoplexy with the water that it gives that apoplexy, and then repeat over that with an operation within that it is healed, and similar to make in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the wound of this species.
But however you cover that you remove all cure of the finger by way natural or by way accidental, or by fire, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is sufficient for that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the Collocation of Sable on the Wound.
Sable so veins that are tanned over the wound and forbid the dressing of its operation, and dry up the wound by length of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which is Sable is strong and in him there is not another disease than Sable, then you collect that Sable.
And it is that you command the patient that he stops his head in the table, and suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your prudence; and be that ounce of subtle duplication according to this form:
Or so two ounces gradually in a cos according to this form:
And then collect those veins with sublimate forces, with subtility, and absterges the blood hour by hour, within that you consider those veins to be re-made of the wound and to be stirred up.
And guard that you do not lead the wound to the extremities of the spetum; and if your operation is in front of the sun, and hold fast in your operation so that you do not incise except those veins.
And when you have finished, then you distill in the wound green or corrosive water so that by its acidity it is re-made of Sable.
But if that water is not in your power to collect all in that hour, and then you fill all with the water that it gives pain, and leave it for several days within that it is soothed that pain and is secured from an apoplexy cautery.
And then repeat over him according to which it will come the same manner within that it is healed.
This is the form of the pincers:
Chapter XIX.
Of Reduction of Arryzation to the Nose.
When you cure Arryzation with cautery or acute medicine according to which it is preceded the narrative of him and he is not healed, then do not engender in him but cut over the apoplexy towards the maturity of him, and that you extract all humidity that is in him and fire within that it is uncovered the bone.
And therefore, when it is uncovered this bone and becomes black or corrupted, then you cut him with a instrument by which this form is:
Is named of a sharp point, and is made of iron, and be the round head so that it can hit with the point of a lime or refined by the point of subtility (so as it is in the following form).
And place that over the corrupt place of the bone, and then turn it between the fingers, and press your hand little by little within that you know that corruption is smooth.
And water be made some dry spots, and then restore the place with acute and stypy causes.
Then if the place is consolidated and it is in him good hidden flesh and it separates the chest from the sania and he remains for ten days, and is not renewed and does not apoplexy and does not occur in him accident, then you know that it is healed.
But if not, then it is not in him to be engender but reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: And it is that you discover of second bone with fire or acute medicine, and when it is uncovered the bone, then you cut him according to this form:
The extremity of the iron triangle-shaped, and be the base of him first weakened within that it is at the extremity so as it occurs:
And then place that over the bone, and be that prop of the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little of the wound, and then turn your hand to the tribe within that it penetrates all the bone, and that one feels the patient by touch that it is shaken so as it is being shaken when you place your hand.
Then restore the place with acute medicines, drying them out so as to be dried up:
Then if the flesh and the place are not hardened, then the matter that drains to the parts from behind returns to the nose, so water is put on the patient's foot.
Chapter XX.
Of Reduction of the Eminence of the Wound.
When the wound projects to its totality and does not occur in the movement or decrease, then you relax the patient, and then that which follows, and then pause the wind in the throat by good sacrifice and suck with a little oil of rose and salt and vinegar and honey, and then place the bandage over the wound with a little powder.
And the manner of the powder is that you take sheets of linen, and each sheet be doubled four times; and make these sheets of linen.
Then place those on one another according to the quantity by which the wound needs. Then place those over those with a firm and tight closure; and then change the wind by good sacrifice; and then stop the wind and leave the wound open to the air and the sun.
But if between times the limb is softened, then you consider that it is stiff.
Then stop the limb in front of the sun as well:
And if the wound has been reduced already, then so it is, and if no, then repeat the bandage with the powder and the closure and the wind within that it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Membrane.
When there is disruption in the uveal membrane, and then it is eminent and it appears outside the eyelids with a point of needle, and is represented the figure of man by water, and you want to incise that water, then perform the operation under which I have recalled, that you introduce the needle into the roots of the eyelids on the part of the lacrimal, and then make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the place of the double thread and lift up with that the part of the uveal membrane in the circuit of the needle, and tighten it.
Then extract the needle and place that over the wound by infusing milk in album of hoove, and leave within that it comes down the thread to the uva.
And then heal the wound with water that it comforts him within that the plague is healed.
Some eyelids gather all the part by a circle of linen within the wound's eminence, and then be pierced with a subtle spike that it passes through the eye of the wound, and run the aqueous humors, and descend the wound and enter so much.
And bring in someone strong to heal it.
Chapter .xxii.
On the treatment of eye diseases.
This malady, which is called alcolism, is not anything other than an inflammation which is adjusted like descending water and is not that one.
The method of working on it is that you make the patient lie on a slanted board and straightened up his legs and hold them with two hands; then, between his thighs, place a cushion, and another under his knees, and another under his feet, which have their hands held tightly. Look at the roots of the disease and dry them up so that they do not spread, and stop the light, and the patient looks into the causes as if he saw them.
And if it does not go down, you shall know that it is water.
If it is not prepared for the descent of the disease as I have said, then make the patient lie down on his side and place a thin blade carefully over the area between his legs, touching a little the corner of the conjunctiva at the edge (at the root) of the cornea in the crown, so that the disease may be expelled.
Then, when it is expelled, take some water and dilute it with honey or add honey to the water in which you have already boiled fenugrec and honey.
And then heal all the other causes so that it is healed.
Chapter 22. On the treatment of eye diseases.
On the treatment of water that descends from the stomach.
I have already said about the spices of water in the division and which convents to pierce with the thread showing, then do so for healing.
Then you shall know that it is water. Make the patient lie down on a board and place his legs on a pillow, and hold his chest with one hand, and tighten his throat with the other.
Then place your hand over the eyelid of his left eye if the water is in the left eye; or over the right eyelid if the water is in the right eye.
Then take some alum, if the water is on the left side; or take some salt, if the water is on the right side.
Then place the end of the alum over the edge near the crown by the thickness of the eyelid's flesh on the patient's left side; or place it over the right eye, and roll it up with your hand.
Then pierce into the eyelid' flesh and feel that alum has already reached the root of the eye.
Then, if the measure of the path of alum to the eye is less than the distance from the pupil to the edge of the blackness, it is the crown of the eyelid; for you shall see at that pupilla with the clarity of the corneal layer.
Then place alum in the hole where the water flows out; then, if the water goes down soon, then heal that patient with water in his veins.
Then wait a little if the water is slow to go down; then, if it does not come out soon, stop up that hole before the alum comes out.
Then, when it is dried up and does not go down, take some alum with ease, and roll it in a little rosewater and almond milk; then hold the patient's throat with one hand and pour it into his throat. Then stop up his throat or tie it up with a knot, or press it with a bandage.
Perhaps we are not of that time that puts alum on the ear when it is infected.
Then, if you do not obey your alum in the ear because of its hardness -- for it is some of those people whose ear is hard as stone -- then, when you take the blade which is called albarello (alberid), and this is its form:
Then pierce that conjunctiva with it, and do not stop until you have reached the end of it, and do not stop until you have let out a little alum.
And then put the alum as I said before.
You must prepare for the patient a quiet sleeping place, and he should lie on his back in a dark room, and all movements be prohibited.
Then put on the patient' head a soft cloth, and do not move his head to the right or left at all.
And then take this remedy in the third day.
Then lead that patient out of that dark room and show him some causes; then return the remedy to him in the seventh day.
Then you shall not take water for healing at any time, or soon after taking it. While you are waiting to heal with water only because the water is taken from the body by perspiration.
Then if it happens that the patient's temperature goes up after taking the remedy in the seventh day, then wait and take his temperature again, and make him take water to cool down his fever.
Then you shall absolve the patient' breath and place it over his mouth for him to breathe there from; then he should remain in a dark room for a few days, it is present in the middle of the darkness.
Then lead that patient out of the house gradually and talk to him about his causes.
You shall know that it is not an excuse for a doctor to lose his sight for some time, and then you shall be careful in your practice.
It has already been sent to us from the arts of alchemy, and some say that it does make a fire in the air, and pierce with alum, which draws out water.
But perhaps there is no such thing as perfect water in our country, nor does it come from some of the roots of herbs; and perhaps this water is new.
These are the forms of magic remedies that we have on that one who does not know those:
They are made from iron or iron itself, and they are the extremes of those by this triangular subtlety, the sharp end also as that one is the form.
Chapter 24. On the properties of water.
On the treatment of nasal diseases.
When there are some hidden diseases in the nose, which are put together like a cluster of stones or a polyp; and this disease is called a polyposis because it seems like that one represented. And if the nose is full of cancerous flesh, and if its color is not like that of a lion, then it is a lion's flesh.
Then in that one which is not fraudulent or cancerous, make the patient lie down between his legs and place him in the sun, and pluck the hair from those noses. Then take that one from the front part away, and cut off a little piece of it with a sharp blade easily so that you shall know that all the flesh has been taken; and if there is any reason why it should be kept apart, then take water and put it in a little container which can be separated from it. Then if the patient' temperature goes up after taking the remedy, then wait and take it again; or if there is an attack of a malady from which fever results, then stop taking water; or if the fevers are caused by bad remedies, then cut off the nose completely so that it may be kept apart.
And it shall be done in the nose near the incision, oil or water. Now if the nose is opened and moisture is brought out of the palate, then you will know that it has been cured.
Now if the moisture does not penetrate as far as it covers, then you will know that inside it is flesh on the upper bones of the nose where there has been no incision.
Then cover it with a thin layer of manure and place one of the nuts on top of it, and another between each nut, and make a hole in the nose to let it out, or for any other reason that may be possible.
And then if it is necessary that the smell come out through the nose, so that it can reach the nostrils and be thrown onto the person's face, because it is like this that children are taught in school, and a bad habit for anyone who wants to do it.
And then place the two extremities of the string, one that comes out over the nose and the other that hangs in the nose, and then bind the meat to the nuts that are on the string, and let it come out so that you know that the meat is already on the nuts of the string.
And then take the string out, and place it in the nose near the incision for three days or more until the meat has completelyè…çƒ‚
And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for some days until it is cured.
Now if you see that the cure has failed, use the following:
This is the form of the instrument that purifies and makes medicine in the nose:
Make it from silver or brass, which is like a small lamp that is opened up, with a small needle, and the medicine like this.
And if you want, make a closed tube like this with a needle, and the tube of the instrument that purifies is flat, open; which should be held in your hand on the back of it, from which you can pour oil or water that you want from the sucks and causes that are to be treated.
Chapter 25
Nose plugs
Nose plugs should be used in the two extremities of the nose, and they are improved and relieved in a few days' time.
And by pouring water over it that you have made to appear at the beginning of its appearance, and wash it all out. Then place a hot cautery or burning medicine on the area.
Now if the incision has taken a long time to heal, then consider it hard, dry, of bad color and poor feeling, then do not touch that part with iron for fear that the wound will get infected through the great malignity of that part on the person who has that injury.
And if the wound is a sharp injury and not of bad color, and sometimes if an incision can be made in all of it, then empty the patient and make an incision with great care, and cure the area with water that removes and presses it within until it is cured.
Chapter 26
Of nose and mouth sutures and of the ear when the continuity is broken by plague or by similitude.
You should know that if a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is given little to no benefit except in certain cases.
Then if any of those causes occur, you should consider it to be a fresh plague with the person's face, and then join the two lips together with a suture, and then cure that area within until it is cured.
And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each is healed separately, then you should know that any separation of the hair from its root is also cured. Then join the two lips together with a strong suture and strengthen them, and sprinkle over those trissat seeds of dragon'e egg and mustard, and place on the powder a piece of plaster of Paris, or of any other of the consolidating plasters, and leave it like that for two days or three, then take off that plaster and replace it with another one and leave it like that until the wounds are healed, and then cure them with water within until they are cured.
Now the way of the suture is that you add to the solution of continuity or with needles as has been mentioned above in the suture of the abdomen, or add to the solution of continuity with thread.
Chapter 27
Of the causes that cause the separation of those two lips from within.
There are various causes that cause the separation of those two lips from within: some are due to minor issues such as dry skin or poor diet, while others may be due to more serious conditions like oral cancer or facial trauma. Some separations occur gradually over time, while others can happen suddenly and require immediate medical attention.
Then know that you should join those lips together and fill the gap with a strong material, and then remove any scabs that form within until the wound is healed, and then wash it with vinegar and stir it, and cure that area with water that stiffens it, until it is cured.
Chapter 28
Of incision of the meat that is adjusted in the gums.
Then remove the flesh that is attached to the gums and which the old people call albugineous; then, when you have suspended that piece or if you hold it in your fist, and have cut off its base and sides, let it run out or wash it away with water.
Then place over that spot three times of wise powder or other astringent or extenuating powders.
And if that meat comes back, then cut it again and cauterize it a second time, for the cautery will not return again.
Chapter .xxix.
Of reason of teeth being made.
When on the surface of the teeth in their splits and of the roots and between the gums are harsh, rough, and some whiteness is made there by the gum's corruption, and some of the teeth become yellow.
Then, when you have opened the mouth between your teeth and placed the upper jaw over it, and raked the teeth in which those roughnesses appear like sand within that they do not cause any trouble, then make of them whiteness or yellowness or other color than that they may be cleaned.
Then if it is left that it is in those of the beginning of the reason, it is good; and if not, then you must repeat the reason over them on another day and the second and third until you come to the last statement in which you want to.
And know that the teeth need different shapes and forms of relief according to how they are prepared for your operation. And because the reason that the tooth is split between the teeth is different from the reason by which it is cut between roots according to other forms, and these forms of reasons are always prepared by you, which you will see soon enough.
Chapter.xxx.
Of tooth root extraction.
Then you must extract the tooth of its pain completely and delay a total extraction of it, because there is no excuse for extracting that tooth when it is not painful, because it is a substance that rises up within it.
More, when the jaw is forced to extract that tooth, you must firmly make sure which tooth is painful, because a pain of that tooth dispels the jaw and makes it so that it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and this pain does not cease until the unhealthy tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this by operation of the barbaries.
Then you must make sure which tooth is painful and that you know it well; then, when you have scraped in the course of the tooth with a scalpel where there is any virtue, from the beginning completely within the gum, and little by little at first cut it off with scissors or other fine cutting tools until that part comes out.
Then you place in his strong grasp large by good talk or loud noise, and place the upper jaw between the teeth of that side that is not painful to you, and this tooth cut according to the shape it had before; then take care not to break it apart, nor to give pain to the upper jaw.
And then if it is not broken, take one of those instruments, and remove it easily from the patient's foot with a gentle effort as though it were made at the beginning.
More, if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you must make sure that you keep away from that part of the thread with its sharp end at a small distance so as not to cut it in your constriction on it with those handles.
Then you must open it exactly with a scalpel in the course of all that part of the gum and keep your strength so as not to break it apart, and return to the upper jaw for its malice is less than the first pain of it.
Then you must not make a mistake as did those bad and audacious barbers in their final moment of their practice on the extraction of their teeth, for we have heard that they bring about men's bad teeth, all of whose roots are broken, or some of them, or extract it with such bones of the jaw; thus have witnessed with regard to these.
And then let the extraction of it be washed out with water or salt water or vinegar.
And if there is bleeding of blood with water, as it happens sometimes, then cut a little quantity of zege and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and the fine handles are made by which the tooth is worked at the beginning with a long handle, a small grasp, and a thick one, that they may not be doubled up when working with them.
So then as the shape of those large handles so that when you begin to work with them they do not double up, but small ones.
They are made of iron of Indian descent, which is a very hard iron, and on the extremities of them some of those teeth are larger than others and break through by constriction that is strong, and some of the extremities of those teeth are shaped like the beak of a crow, as it were, and they are of very hard constriction.
Chapter.xxxi.
Of tooth extraction and breaking the bones of the jaw that is broken.
Then when you want to extract the tooth that is broken for some reason, then place it in the area with a cloth or bandage for a day or two until the area is softened; and then place the extremities of those teeth with which it is broken together with the forceps, as it were:
The extremities of them are made within like a lime or an alfil.
Then if you do not obey these instruments or the handles, then cut off the meat from the root and take this instrument which is called an awl, as it were, its shape is this:
It has a large end and a small one, and is not buried so that it does not break.
Then if by chance the root is broken, it is good; and if not, help yourself to these other instruments, whose shapes are as follows: The shape of the first instrument is triangular at its extremities and some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it has a triangular shape and a small end:
And now you are helped with these instruments without having two ramps, whose this one is the shape of the ramp: And with other instruments for shaving teeth, because it is quickly done with this instrument which is made like an alfiler; and its shape is as follows:
of a triangular end that is twisted or short, which has some thickness, and is not buried so that it does not break.
And know that the teeth' instruments are similar to other instruments.
Then the wise and skillful craftsman in the art, by his own means does what the others cannot do or pause for it is the operation of the bad ones due to the shapes of different species.
Then if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth are broken, then cut it carefully with the knife that is convenient to you from among the instruments and forceps which we have spoken about in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with the handles of which this one is the shape:
And is it necessary to bring the patient closer gradually, and bind or press him at the mouth so that he does not escape or flee before the bone is completely broken; and then restore the place with suitable medicines for water.
But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then cut it from that side and from the blackness of that side and cure it from within so that it may heal.
Chapter .XXXII.
On the Treatment of Excellent Teeth over Other Teeth.
When teeth are excellent and do not follow the natural course of the jaw by their shape, and more so when they involve the females and especially the elderly ladies; then consider this: if one tooth is separate from another, and cannot be joined or treated with linament, then cut it off; but if it is not attached to any other tooth, then you should mark it with this instrument whose shape it is; and it is similar to a pig's death and is made of Indian steel with an acute end.
And your incision should be on the tool that you mark off that tooth in three days because of the hardness of the tooth and so that it is not attached to any other teeth.
And if an excellent tooth is expanded to the file, then file it with a file of Indian steel of the same shape.
And all of it is made of Indian steel and the point is very fine; and make needles with this file whose teeth are few and made slowly in three days by ease because any other tooth will not be attached and will not stick together. Then cut it off with a thin knife, and cut it with an extremely sharp razor.
And if there is a tooth that has one part broken and the tongue is affected, then consider this: you should file off that part of the tooth whose sharp edge is sticking out and which is pushed in, and make it flat so that the tongue does not hurt or the word be corrupted.
Chapter.XXXIII.
On the Restoration of Broken Teeth with Gold or Silver Wire.
When a tooth is broken or removed by blow or impact, and the patient cannot bear it more than what wire of gold can carry, and you have treated that with stinging medicines, and your treatment has not helped, then so that it does not hurt in those teeth that are bound with gold wire, and not with silver wire, because silver becomes yellow and hardens quickly, whereas gold does not change or alter;
And let the wire be of such thinness and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the cut is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and then stretch it twice by twisting it between two bound teeth, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat this process to the opposite side of that part from which you began, and bind it more tightly with ease and simplicity so that it does not hurt or be bound.
And your tightening should be on the tool with which you tighten the wire to the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
And you should cut off the excess ends of the wire with forceps or tongs, and place them in any way you want, and cover them up between the healthy tooth and the bound tooth, so that they do not damage the tongue. Then leave it like this for three days with rope.
But if it falls or is twisted, then tighten it or them with the other wire at all times.
This is the form of teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two bound teeth, thus tied:
And when one tooth or two returns to its original position in their places, and are healing properly, and remain so.
It does not do this except with skilled and wise people.
Some are apt for some cause of cow bones, and it is made from them in the shape of a tooth, and placed in its place where the tooth fails, and is tightened as we have said, and remains there and serves for a long time.
Chapter.XXXIV.
On the Incision of the Ligament which is seen in the tongue and prevents speaking.
This ligament, which leaves the tongue on some occasions or is natural to the person, or happens accidentally and occurs due to a plague that has already healed.
And the operation in it is that you work on the patient's mouth, the lower jaw existing in the upper jaw; and raises its tongue, and cut this ligament according to the width so that the tongue is freed from its root.
But if there is any hardness or swelling in it, and water has stood because of the plague's consolidation, then cut off that ligament from its width so that it does not split the ligament and dissolve the inflammation.
And beware that there is no crack made in the bone's front part, and do not cut here the marrow and let the blood flow from there; and it is dangerous to split the skull bone.
Then let it be washed with warm water or cold water or a damp cloth; and let it rest from the tongue so that it does not become consolidated again; and this is the way in which the patient leaves his tongue in any new thing so that it does not become swollen again.
But if there is a flow of blood, then place it above the affected area; but if the blood flows, then cauterize that place with dry-burning iron, which is used for water. Then treat this one differently from other causes until it is healed.
Chapter.XXXV.
On the Extraction of a Ruminant from the Tongue.
Some are left on the tongue, like a small swelling that prevents speaking, and naturally occurs to it; and there is a strong one that is difficult to put up with, and it disturbs the mouth.
And the operation in it is that you open the patient' mouth on both sides of the sun, and examine the swelling.
And if it changes its color from white or black, which is hard, then do not touch that because it is sharp.
And if it changes from white color, which means moisture, then put oil on it, and cut off that part with a sharp knife, and cut it all off; and if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then pause wearing loose clothes, so is corrosive, until it stops bleeding.
Then return to your work until you have finished it with praise for him, within the context of being washed with cold water and salt, and cure it with another treatment for water until it is healed.
Chapter.XXXVI.
On the Extraction of a Swelling from Two Ears and from that which is Nothing in the Ear, and Other Swellings.
When the ear is swollen and hot, so are glands that are gathered, which occur before two ears, when you treat them with water that we have said in the division, and if they do not heal, then consider whether the swelling is hard and of different colors, and does not feel good; then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; instead, let it dry until it heals, and then cut off that part, or let someone rip it off.
And if it is of white color, which means weakness, and the shape of its root is fine, then that part should be cut off, so that it does not remain;
Here is the translation of the text:
It shall be made of silver or iron, and it shall be sharp with a knife.
And when you press on him the tongue and it is shown to you the inflammation, and catch on him the third veil, then take onci and hold him in the armhole, and pull him at the edges outside as far as you can. Also that you pull some cause of the veils, and then cut it with that instrument in which this is the form:
Also that you pull some cause of the veils, and then cut it with that instrument in which this is the form: And it is assembled with forceps, but the extremities of them are curved, so that the orifice of each of them is on the end of the other, very sharp, which is of iron in a shell covered.
If this instrument is not to you present, then cut it with a blade in which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one side, and not sharp on the other side.
And then that you have cut one hole, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and immediately cut the hernia with sharp water.
But if there is a flow of blood, clean water from the decoction of wormwood or of mulberry leaves and similar to those of the stinging nettle within that the flow of blood is restricted, then cure him within that it is healed.
And some veiled in the collar other inflammations those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said in the cutting of two holes even.
And I have already cured a woman of an inflammation which was born in her collar of him, which inflammation tended to a dark color, of little feeling, the woman had already closed her collar, and she breathed with a clear breath, and had prohibited him eating and drinking water, and it had come close to death if he had stayed one day or two.
And the inflammation had already fought so much that it had opened two holes within that it comes out by two passages.
Then I hid myself with a knife and I cut him in one of his oncis, and I pulled it out, and I threw away a lot of it, and then I cut it again with that same knife, and I held his tongue, and I put the onci in that inflammation.
Then I took away a lot of him, and there was not blood flowing from him except a little blood. Then I cured her completely of that inflammation, and she began to drink water again, and soon afterwards an inflammation came in its place, which I cut within that it does not last long.
Then I hid myself and cauterized his collar, then I went around, and I did not know what to do with that one next to me, and I knew what to do with that one next to him, and I came back.
Chapter. 37.
Of the cutting of a hernia when it is inflamed.
When there is a discharge of pus in the hernia and it is long, then it is called a boil; and if it is in the edge fine and round, then it is called a carbuncle.
But when it is cured with water which I have said in the division, and do not trust your cure, and this inflammation has already gone away from him and it is thin, then know that you cut off what is round; and if it is long, and it is bloody, of dark or black color, and does not hurt him, then know that you have cut off his hernia, for in that there is a fear about the hernia.
And when you see that one according to the method which I have said of its whiteness and longitudin, then cut off the hernia and press his tongue against the instrument with which it is made this form, and put onci in the new, and pull that down and cut it with a knife or scalpel.
And know that you do not cut off that one except with water which comes out naturally to the addition, because if you cut it further, then you will lose your speech.
And immediately the cutting, use water which I have said in the cutting of two holes, and cure that within that it is healed.
If the hernia was frightened by the cutting of him, know that you use ingen in the cauterization of it is afraid, and the method of cauterizing in it is only water which I have said, and it is because you hold the top of the hernia between your hands, and immediately the water will be ready. And when the instrument has come to a hole or hollow, fill it with water; and if it does not fill with water, then take off a little blood. And from that water come out naturally, and then cut it with a blade or scalpel.
May the length of it be concave within which the medicine is put as with the concavity of a spoon, and hold the instrument to the medicine on the tongue, and let the hernia fall from him on his neck so that it does not drop by a little blood. And let the instrument come to the hole or hollow, fill it with water; and if it does not fill with water, then take off a little blood. And from that water come out naturally, and then cut it with a blade or scalpel.
And then take your hand away from the medicine, and press it on the tongue for an hour or so that it does not become blackened and softened by the chewing of the medicine.
And if you want, take hold of it and wrap it on the end of a ray, and dip the crotch in the medicine, and push the ray into the crotch until the crotch sticks to it, and make water with that one so many times as you can obtain water for the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it lie. For it will dry up and fall off after three or four days.
And if you do not know that the medicine will return, return it, and then the cauterization wash away in the circuit of the uvula with the crotch stuck on it, and moisten him with the water which comes out from the circuit of him with the medicine, and clean him thoroughly with the embrocation, and apply to himself within that he is healed.
And this kind of cure is more secure than cutting and less dangerous from fear.
Some are cured with water which is more subtle than cauterization and less dangerous from fear, because it is cured with the submergence in this way: Take dry herbs such as camphor, tobacco, oregano, mint, and similar to them, and place them all in a dish, and cover them with vinegar, and boil; and let the herb-dish be placed on the edge of the bowl, and hold an instrument which is sharp of iron according to this method; it shall be made of silver or iron.
And then put the end on him in his mouth within that the vapour comes to the uvula from the water, and the uvula is dimmed with it.
And then repeat over that many times as it is dry, and remember not to make this cure with the coming of an inflammation, for it will fit too well in the inflammation, and do not do water, but rather keep the declaration of the inflammation of him.
May you not be at this time with the instrument, take a cane and place on the end a cup of fur, so that the mouth of the patient is closed, because the cup of the fur prevents the vapors to burn the mouth.
This cure is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
On Extracts of Thorns and Water That Adheres to the Jaw and Other Causes.
Moothe seen in the jaw or thorns of paynes or any other cause.
Then know that you extract water that appears there, above which the sight is directed, since you press the tongue against the instrument in front of the sun, so that to you may be revealed the water that is in the jaw.
And the water that does not appear to you in the jaw is hidden, know that you force the patient to vomit before food is digested in the stomach, because the attached cause causes the jaw to be foraged by vomiting; or if the patient swallows a stone of naphtha or of radish of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a dry sponge of sea-leather and dip it strongly in wine, and put it on the patient's tongue, because it is then foraged; And you take a worm and dip it strongly in wine, and put it on the table and extract it; or you take a pig' foot and place it above and below the table and extract it;
May you not be foraged by those causes that I have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is rounder than a little finger, and in the end there is a cavity which you enter into the patient' jaw with ease.
And place the hand of the patient on his head, and keep that touch of the jaw bone or thorn, or that he eats with his mouth what is stuck in the bone, or that he swallows the medicine with his mouth.
However, the patient who enters it is worse, because his knowledge of the site of the attached cause and the blockage in the jaw, and he pulls his hand towards the instrument on his head, all according to the quantity that is prepared for him so that he may be foraged.
Chapter.xxxix.
On Extracting Blood That Is Attached to the Jaw.
When the medicine is blood mixed with water that I have mentioned in the division of the treatment with medicines and it does not agree with you, then consider in the jaw of the patient towards the sun, since your tongue has been pressed against the instrument which I have told you about.
Then if you wish to extract the blood, extract it with a small needle or with subtle gestures carefully.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and insert it into the jaw of the patient, and place a burning iron in the concave part of the tube, and make as many holes (as long as the blood has stopped being in the jaw) and stop up the patient' jaw all day with water.
Then take a full jar of water and operate the patient' mouth with it, and wash his mouth with that; and do not swallow any cause or taste water for an hour after, because blood is soon felt.
May you not be foraged by water that I have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafoetida using the instrument which I have told you about in the sufligation of the uvula.
Make water, so as to quench thirst.
And this is another way of operating by suffumigation with water, that you take a cup in which there are carbonized fires and the cup is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a truc (a kind of tube), and connect the end of the instrument to that truc; then remove the suffumigated; and place the patient' mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the suffumigation does not escape until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood, because the blood soon feels when it is quenched.
And if it does not work, then repeat the suffumigation several times, and stop up the patient from drinking, and eat salty foods and drinks, and do not drink water, and likewise, if necessary, you are to be foraged by this regimen.
This is the form of the instrument with which blood from the jaw is extracted when it is seen; and it is similar to tweezers sometimes, but because it is in any curve. and the end of it is similar to an elephant' tusk, which is sharp, but because when you press any cause, that does not let go.
Chapter.xl.
In which is the sum of speech in apperception of aphasias and section of laringe.
The aphasias are special words, in various ways, according to the remembrance of them, of each one in this book.
And they are so different in piercing and sectioning them by two methods, one of which is due to the species of aphasias in itself; and the other because they press on the humors.
And the second way is due to the places in which things happen in the body, because the accidental aphasias in the head are other than those that occur in the neck; and the accidental aphasias in the flesh are other than those that occur in the joints; and each of them is a problem in operation.
And some aphasias are such that, instead of being pierced, they are properly cured by the maturation of the matter in those or completion of them.
And other aphasias are such that when they are pierced it is because they have been properly cured by the maturation of the matter in those or completion of them; so also with aphasias that are prop to joints, because an aphasias when it appears prop to a joint, the essence of that part is prolonged until it comes into contact with blood that has been properly cured; and strong corruption occurs in the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it causes contraction of that member; or it is an aphasias prop to a main member, and if you delay piercing it, proper maturation does not occur to the main member; or it is prop to the rear parts, therefore it is pierced properly; and not being pierced by the proper time, from the non-completion of digestion, but that which is prop to the rear parts, so that it cannot reach the forward part of the rectum, and a fistula is formed, or that it is formed in the term of that part that it does not heal. May you know the time for piercing the aphasias, and then it is when they are properly cured.
And you know that it is cured when there is a cessation of pain and a diminution of fever, and a decrease of pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the aphasias, and the other symptoms.
And since you know the piercing is done in the proper place, far from the aphasias, and far removed from the cure of the eminence.
And the piercing should be done at a certain time, whether it is far from the head or the body, if the aphasias are in the joints of the members or in the feet, and in the places that are not reflections; because in those that are reflections, use the piercing according to that member.
May you know that when the aphasias are in carnous places, then pierce them within proper maturation of the matter in them according to completion of digestion; for if you pierce those before water, it is prolonged the course of the pus from the part and a strong corruption occurs on the lips of that part and the depth of that part.
May the piercing of the hernias be made according to the length of the flesh or of the body, depending on necessity, or according to the part where the member is indignant.
And if you administer a small piercing, in the hernias make a large and wide or several cuts according to the variation of the size of the hernias.
And in the hernias where it is necessary to cut and burn, when you do so, use a knife and make a cut in terms that it has already stopped, as if it were done in pairs of cuts and bumps.
And of those that are cut on the section having three angles; and of those that are cut in the shape of a leaf, in the hernias of the arms.
And of those where the round or lunar section is administered, and similar to them.
May he who has lions' hernias be pierced with a shallow piercing, or a flat one only.
And if the hernia is large and has already collected some dirt, pierce it and do not cauterize it in that moment; take out a part of it, and on the next day take out another part, and take out more, according to the gradient until you have removed all of it.
And mainly if the patient is a man of valor, or a woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit that moves the pus is resolved to escape from the hernia, and the hernia hurts the patient heavily, and you close it up.
Keep this chapter with great care, and when you pierce these hernias, remember not to cause any disease; but if the hernia is large, and the cuts of the piercing are deep, then remember that you stop the flow in some place where it can join together.
And if a part of the hernia is cut off or broken in half, then remember to gather it with old cloth or a piece of drape, so that when you have applied heat or sharp tools, there is moisture; and strengthen it after three days, and treat what remains with water until it is healed.
If blood flows during the operation, then you administer warm water and vinegar in which a piece of cloth is soaked, and place it over the area of bleeding.
If the bleeding persists, remember to administer medicine and powder that I have recommended in many places of this book and division.
If it is wintertime, and the place of the hernia is a place of cold nerves, then remember to dip the powder in wine or oil, and place it on the areas.
And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy, then remember to place powder in water or oil, or in wine or oil, and all of this should be applied after three days, as we have said, and when you open the hernia and stop the flow of blood and administer its treatment with water until it is healed.
And finally is the water that is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of hernias in general; but each hernia has its own way of being cured, as we have already said, and each chapter will speak about the cure of a specific type of hernia.
Chapter L.
Of the section of hernias that come in the head of the patient.
In the head, there are small hernias, and they contain membranes that are part of them; and the types of hernias that are in the head.
And of those is the pus, and of those contains moisture resembling lemon juice. And of those that contain moisture resembling milk, and similar to them; and of those that are hard, and dry.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those that do not cause pain, you should not fear causing trouble for the body.
And the operation in the section of those is that you apply them with an instrument that is called an entomes, so that you know that it contains.
Because if the water contained is moisture, then cut them with a section according to length, with a shallow section according to this shape:
And start in the section of line B within the line G; therefore, when you remove the moisture, scrape that part where the moisture was contained, and do not leave any trace of it, because some residue remains if you do not.
And dip it in Egyptian ointment, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with the pus and leave it for another day, because with water you remove all that is on the skin's surface.
And repeat on that piece of cloth with Egyptian ointment twice and third time if you feel it necessary to do so, within the next day, in order that you are sure that there is no residue left of that film; then treat the pus with ointment until it is healed.
And if the hernia contains fatty nodules, then you cut them according to this shape: With a round section, and get two knuckles between the two sides of the section; and cut all of it, and with your strength try to remove the membrane that contains it.
If your operation causes trouble, then first ask me for help.
In the hernia that is lapified, and of the treatment according to what you have said; section over the lapified hernia is light pus, because it is a little blood and little moisture.
And some times these hernias are the same in men and women who have little moisture; and because they can cut them with a sharp knife on the top of the patient's head, but if you press hard, it will make a loud noise and hurt the patient.
May the other hernias be discussed in another chapter, because they do not belong to this book; and all types of hernias that come on children's heads, and how to cut them, because their section is shallow.
And do not pierce those hernias with the first hole made low; in order that the body is relieved from the pus by the second hole that you make low.
And then treat them with water until they are healed.
Chapter LII.
Of the section of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
And these hernias can occur in the neck, and on the shoulders, and on the arms; and some times they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and some of them are born there; and all types of scrofulas are treated in the same way as we have recommended for nodules and hernias on the head.
The types of these scrofulas are pustules, because some of them are hard, and some contain moisture; and the malicious ones that do not respond to treatment.
And in the color of water that is evident, which corresponds to the color of the hernia cord, and it is not attached to any nerves or blood vessels, and it does not cause pain, then cut it with a shallow section from top to bottom on either side of the line G; then scrape that piece of cloth with scissored knuckles twice, if necessary; and if you have them, use two knuckles.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve should not be cut.
And the scalpel should not be hot, that it does not hurt you with your hand while cutting, or that it annoys the patient, and you do not cut where it is not necessary; for if you cut a vein or an artery and stop your operation from continuing, pause in the plague of three-fold vinegar or other powders which flow blood, and then take off the wound, and leave that within which the acuteness of the pustule is soothed and the skin is softened and begins to rot. When the pus is cut off.
Then return to your operation where you have not finished it yet.
And then ask him if there is any cause of the other little scrofula, then cut them and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the great scrofula, cover that you do not cut that scrofula from its root. In advance, cover that you do not cut it and let that which falls down by itself if it is no harm.
Then fill the wound with a wet cotton wool which you have already dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
And if you cut the whole scrofula, then cover that you adjust the two lips of the wound and leave it for a moment so that there is no excess pus.
More if you think that there is excess pus because of the size of the scrofula, then cut the root of it, and then wash it and apply ointment.
And those scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce that with a superficial puncture here where you see the place of maturation of it, and pause the puncture so that the pus from the body comes out, then let it dry as we have said.
Then administer the puncture, with ointment and poultice as to those, so that it corrodes what is new of the corruption. Then when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then you cure it with ointment made from meat, so that it is healed.
Chapter. LXXII.
On the section of the scrofula of the accident from a guolayro.
They said that this section in the epidemic is not seen by anyone on our land that it has been done.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
More in men there are differences, then the extract of the epidemic is avoided by water, which does not quickly heal all because all veins and the main one of the patient are here.
More in those who have pustules on the lips or on two ears, when the malady is not in the mouth, then avoid the section of the epidemic to escape the ruin that is made by puncture.
Then when we want to cut water, let us make the section of the epidemic with three circles of the epidemic, or four to a small section by its width between two circles for quantity, so that the section is made in the skin, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for cutting, because it lacks meat and the vessels of blood from it are easily cut.
And if the doctor is a little bit, then let him extend the guolayro with nine inches, and then cut that cord so that it reaches the duct, more avoid the vessels of blood if they do not cut anything of a cause.
Then administer the second cinch as we have recalled; and it is signified on the section of the duct with the flame, which is of that eye that does not hurt him but stops it.
And leave the wound open for a while.
Then when the hour is renewed in which the puncture is painful, add two lips to the cord of the wound, and cut that one alone, it is cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make the flesh heal quickly so that it is healed.
And Albucasis said that the summary of the sermon we have recalled, exposition is not but to see that some of these scrofulas have already come out by themselves, and the patient has come within death, and his life-string is cut, and some will cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through that place for a little breathing, and he is saved from death.
And by water I command that the wound be left open so that the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it is for three days; and then I command to do so with the wound, and heal that which has been healed.
And that which I have seen in my own eyes, is that a servant brings a knife and cuts it into the guolayro and cuts a little of the cana of the lung, and I was called to the cure of it, and I heard the roar of the sick man, and I discovered the wound and stopped the blood which was flowing from it.
Then you confessed that she had not cut a vein or a nerve, and the wind of the wound came out, and I healed that which was healed.
And did not happen to the servant if he did not break his teeth, and then some days later returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
Then say you that in the section of the epidemic there is no fear.
Chapter. XLI.
On the section of the scrofula which occurs in the guolayro outside, and it is called a hernia from the guolayro.
This scrofula named a hernia of the guolayro is a great second scrofula according to the color of the body, and it is more in women.
It has two ways because it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one does not heal.
And the accidental is according to two ways, and one is similar to green knots, and another way is similar to scrofula which is done by knotting an artery, and in that there is fear. And do not say that it is done on purpose because it seems like a small thing. Then you put that and investigate that with the said thing, and if you find it similar to a green knot, and not cut it from any vein, then cut that there where the knot is, and extract it with water which counts it from the peel and bursecle; and otherwise, then examine all his being, and then heal the place with water which heals quickly so that it is healed.
Chapter. XLV.
On the section of knots.
Of knots there are many kinds, and I have already said all the kinds of them in the division.
And you remind me that it is difficult to make the difference between a knot and an exit because of its shape.
Then you say that it is the quality of a fever and pain which is intense within so that the pus of the wound is dried up because the heat of the pus is not cooled down, and that is complete corruption which stops the fever, pain, and heat.
More a knot is not quality or fever or pain, and it counts the skin over it, and the lion which is white inside.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a knot and is done by puncture, which is more or less, and it is according to two kinds because it is either grass-like and contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are different, as I said in the division.
And so, when you come to the cure of joints, which is called the infiltrations, ask at the beginning for the instrument that is called the introducer, according to whether its form will be in the chapter that is closest to this.
And this is the way to inquire about blisters and all joints, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place that you wet with your finger until it hurts; then you will move your fingers a little by a little, so that you know that the instrument has already penetrated the joint.
Then return your hand according to the measure of the size of the blister, and take out the introducer and consider whether it is sitting in the wound.
And if the current moisture has been forgotten, of any color it is, then you shall cut it on the superficial section according to what I have said in the other blisters.
And if there is no moisture in the trace of the introducer, then you know that it is dry.
Then dry it on top of the section without a shape of a crust according to this form: Thus as I have taught you, and hold it with your knuckles, and wipe the joint of all parts easily, and save the pelle or sack, if you can, on top of it, and extract that fluid to the node.
Maybe if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that fluid, and you will see small drops on top of it, and then you shall extract them in pieces so that it does not rupture for any reason.
If, however, it ruptures for any reason, little or too much, the node returns according to what I have said.
And if you wish that it does not rupture for any small part, then make the whole area of some corrosive and sharp powders, and strengthen the area, and place it on that blister that sits, and cure that with another cure within that is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you shall cut the two lips of it and cure that with the fluid that enters.
Maybe if it is pulsatile blood coming out to the opposite side, or not-pulsatile, then you shall cover and bandage the area with three layers of wool that are acrid and leave it there for two days or three within which the wound can heal and the blister can be removed from the node.
Chapter. XLVII
On the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those are three species of introducers; one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
The form of the large introducer is:
The form of the small introducer is:
If it is made of iron, of lead, and of sharp ends that are properly trimmed, so that the instrument enters into blisters.
These are the forms of the instruments, and they are named only by their shapes; one of them is called biridi.
Of three species, because one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
The form of the large instrument, shape of it:
The form of the medium instrument, shape of it:
The form of the small instrument, shape of it:
It is convenient that they are made for blisters and sores and fistulas and boils in order that they may enter those of the bones and other causes.
And they are round, large and sharp, with needles sewed on them, and they are made of lemon resin, or of iron or silver; and the thousands are made when they are made of lemon resin.
And the instruments are made of black plums, which it is convenient that they be opened for those fistulas in the concavity of which they reflect themselves to their own levitation, to those reflections.
Of three species; because one is long, and another is medium, and another is short; according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Shape of the large instrument of lead:
Shape of the medium instrument of lead:
Shape of the small instrument of lead:
The shapes of the introducers are of different species; because one is simple, having only a single curve, and there are three species of them: large, small, and medium.
And they are instruments with sharp ends, and there are three species of them.
And these introducers have two curves, and there are three species of them.
And these instruments have three curves, and they are of three species.
All of them are necessary in their place.
Shape of the simple small introducer, shape of it:
Shape of the large introducer with two curves: Shape of the medium introducer with two curves: Shape of the small introducer with two curves:
Shape of the large introducer with three curves:
Shape of the medium introducer with three curves:
These are the shapes of the scalpel with which nodes and blisters are cut and scraped; they are of three species, because one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
Shape of the large scalpel:
Shape of the medium scalpel:
Shape of the small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the others are not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but so that it is quickly made in the incision of blood or nerves, and because of this it heals the patient and relaxes the anxiety of the incision of a vein or nerve, and for this reason it heals the blister and brings peace.
These are the forms of the cauterizers, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, thus: with wands.
If it is made of iron, and seems like fire to it, so that it makes alcohol.
And it is in the extreme part of punctured with hidden salt and in that course within and without, if you wish, thus: with veils.
The forms of the spices, which are mixed between the two layers to make the piercing of blisters and not feel the bad flavors; they are of three species: large, medium, and small. These are the forms of those:
The shapes of the ventilators with which the flow of air is stopped, and they are of three species; large, medium, and small; shape of it:
If it is made of lemon resin, round in shape with some length, and it is subtle.
And these species of ventilators should be large, medium, and small; so that by their stopping the flow of air in need, and then when you first try them, they are not medicine.
However, do not use them to stop the air in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy places, such as those on the arms and legs, and those under clothes, and similar ones; seemingly to their own flesh's.
And some needles are made of those instruments, smaller in size, resembling scalpel blades according to this form; for which the cut is done when made by phlebotomy, or by incising a vein or an artery.
And some needles are round according to this shape:
Chapter .xliii.
Of the care of male breasts, which are assembled from female breasts.
Some breasts become inflamed in the breasts of certain men when they are covered with hair and then Inflated breasts and assembled from female breasts, and Roman aposto-suces, far away.
And for those who eat this, it is necessary that you cut them into a lunar section according to this form, from the line B to the line G, and then remove all the crudity, and then fill in the plague with medicated ointment, and then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and heal the inner part that should be san-
But if the breast declines to the splits and is softened by its size, then let it be cut in two pieces on top of each other, in two sections resembling a lunar shape, each of which is contained in the other according to this form from line B to line G. And then remove the crudity, and then cut the string that connects between the two lips of the wound, and stop the bleeding, and administer what has been said about the suture and the powders, there being necessary in the cure within that it should be healed.
And if you do not please the cutting of what has been said that it is necessary to cut by the inquietude of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then let it be filled with a cure of oil submerged in a corrosive solution and leave that inner part which is corroded by it to turn gray, and then heal that inner part that should be healed.
Chapter.xliv.
Of the perforation of pustules that come from the inside out.
These pustules that come from the inside out are of the species of scrofulas and dure, which have a skin covered with a hair.
And of those some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are cut according to this lunar section: from line G to line B. And when it is all emptied out there being no more moisture in the pustule, then you remove the crust with a knife and leave the inner part open for another day.
Then let the crust remain and be healed by the oil that is convenient to it, within that it should be healed.
And if the pustule of the joints is, and of the scrofulas, then you divide them above that inner part as has been said in the section about scrofulas on all sides.
But if the plague is extended in a way that it causes the decay of the flesh, then administer to it the cauterization according to what has been said before.
Chapter.xlix.
Of the perforation of pustules that happens through an artery or a vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the knot is consolidated which is above it, then motes of pustules appear that are accumulated at the root of the body; and when you hear a sound from them by touching them with your fingers, you feel a strid-ing sound.
And the one that is through a vein is round towards the surface of the body.
And the section on this pustule is a mistake, and mostly in those that are from the inner sides of the arms, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is great, so that its cure with iron is avoided, and that which is at the extremities or the top, is to be avoided.
But above that which is caused by the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut it in half; and then open the section to the needle, and release the tourniquet within that it is uncovered.
Then place the needle on that one and let it enter into the other, and tighten the artery with a double knot in two places; which causes you to lose your sight in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then punch the place between the two threads with a spike within that it causes the entire pain to go away, and let the pustule be dissolved.
Then administer a cure that generates poison within that it causes the threads to fall; and then heal that with oil convenient for the healing of water within that it should be healed.
And if it is a pustule from the section of a vein, then let you have on your hand what you can reach to the pustule with your thread, and then let the needle enter; and make a double knot in that place where you have taken the thread from the other one, and then tighten the pustule with the two threads according to what I have said before about the section of the thread of the two parts at the extremities of the thread.
But if you fear to break the thread, then let you place the needle on the tip of the thread before cutting it, and strengthen the threads with four knots.
Then dry the pustule in its place within that when it is wet, then cut off the excess of the knot, and leave that which is under it.
Then place over it the pulse that you have submerged in water and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with water and oil within that it should be healed.
Chapter 1 of the pustule that happens from the twisting of nerves.
As has been said before, when a pustule happens through an artery or a vein, and seems to happen due to excessive work or similarly.
And it is most likely in the places of the helpers or the trunk, or in any place where joints are massaged.
And this pustule is hard, and it resembles the color of the other body, and when it is hot with its temperature, you feel a kind of stupor in it.
And this pustule is not accumulated at the root of the body, and for this reason the knot is left behind, and it is most likely to be found in advance or behind.
So that from those that are in the joints, it does not seem to be iron-bound, because it is very likely to be broken by force.
But the one that is at the top of the head or the forehead is left with a knot. But if it is a small pustule, then you cut it between the fingers and cut off its roots.
And if it is big, then you suspend it with a needle, and cut off that one, and then stop up that one; and heal that inner part that should be healed.
Chapter L.
Of the perforation of a pustule that happens from the mouth and reaches to the belly.
There are certain kinds of mold-like fungi that resemble the hair and are found in the insides of the belly and other parts of the body; their roots are thin and their heads are thick; and those fungi are among those that are small, and they grow larger.
I have already seen one, and in its belly there were two things that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those that were white, with very thin roots.
And already those lips were turned inward and were bleeding, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Then I turned them upside down and tied them in eight places with twelve knots. and the other six.
And the operation for cutting them is that you consider first if the hunchback is moist, and the color of the skin is white, moist, with subtle furrows; then do the incision with a sharp knife, and are in your presence cauterize them with fire, because drops of blood can be expelled by cutting; and if you get blood, cauterize it.
And if the hunchback is a little bit scared and frightened, do not cut it with iron; but rather take the lead from a recent plaster, and strengthen it on that skin, the way that we have told; and leave it for two days.
Then adjust the tightness of the lead wire; so, do not continue to strengthen the lead as it will be cut and fall by itself after three labors.
But if the lead is thick skin, there is no cause for fear and anxiety in cutting it, and more so in that which is in the belly.
But perhaps you could cut most of it off, and then cauterize it so that it does not come back.
Then treat it there so that the plague is cured.
And be sure to do not cut lead that has a dark color, little feeling, and less regard; for such is absolute cancer.
And I came back to my memory of the craniocerebral injury.
Chapter II.
On the Cure of Eminence in the Umbilicus.
The eminence of the umbilical is caused by some things; or by tears in the cord that hangs over the belly, and has a bag or intestine depending on it according to whether it ruptures in front or behind; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery according to whether it comes from the front or back; or by constriction of wind in it.
But if it is due to tears in the cord and depending on the bag of intestine, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; and it has seven pains, and appears in different places. And if it is due to the escape of the intestine, then the place where this happens to you is that which we have described, and very different from the other; and when you press it with your fingers, it is hidden, and returns strongly to its place, and there is a great noise as if it were broken and the sound is more violent.
But if it is due to moisture, then it is sharp and does not remain hidden when you press your hand on it, nor is it constrained or broken.
And if it is due to blood, then these signs appear: the swelling becomes black and declines towards the lower part.
But if it is due to flesh, then the swelling is heavy, thick, and hard; and it remains depending on its quantity.
But if it is due to constriction of wind, then the touch of it is sharp.
And the operation on it is that you consider first if the eminence of the umbilical is due to blood flowing from an artery or vein, or due to constriction of wind; then keep back from cutting it, because in this there is fear and danger as it has been taught to you in the chapter where it has been said about swelling due to arteries and veins.
And if the eminence of the umbilical is due to the intestine or the bag, then command the hunchback to hold his belly button, and let it stand extended; and go around the whole of the umbilical, and order him to turn his belly towards your feet, and tie a strong knot in the middle part with a rope or leather, and cut off most of the swelling with a sharp knife, and cut off the bottom part of the swelling on both sides. Then turn the hunchback upside down and tie him securely; and cut off the tail of the swelling while he is hanging upside down.
Then cut off the middle of the swelling that is extended over the navel and insert your finger into the opening; and if you do not find any intestine there, then tear it from within the belly with your hand.
And if you have caught the bag, then take it with a sharp knife; and cut off any excess of it.
But if it is opposite to your artery or vein, then go around that, and return to your operation; and take two needles, and put them in those two strings firmly, and insert the needles into the swelling in the same way as you have cut it; and tie the swelling tightly with a knot on both sides of the needles.
And if you want to do so, then take away the needles and leave the place; so that the flesh may spread out and fall of itself; or cut it off when it is thin, and cure it with water that has been boiled.
And if the eminence of the umbilical is due to flesh or moisture, then you have cut off the swelling as we have said, and destroy blood or moisture that is in it; and cure it with water that has been boiled.
Chapter III.
On the Cure of Craniocerebral Injury.
We have said, in the division, of the kind of cranium and how to cure it with medicines, and that it is dangerous to cure it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that a craniocerebral injury is generated in the greatest care for its cure.
And they said that some small craniums are in the place where the eradication of it is possible, so as to remove all of it, and mainly when it is just beginning.
But if it is old and large, do not approach it, because you will not be able to heal it with any medicine nor have I seen anything like it, nor has it come to water.
And the operation on it is as we have said, that you go ahead and leave the hunchback and make him drink black cholera from time to time, and cure him if he becomes constipated in a very obvious way.
Then prepare the hunchback with a preparation in which he is located for the operation, and prophesy in the trancel of those who are called to him; then go around all parts with the scythe so that it does not disturb any cause of his skin. Then let the blood run out of it, and do not wash away the body; express the places, and rinse with water the whole body or the instrument with which you have been able to.
But if you have a contrary nature of large blood flowing from an artery or vein, then cauterize that within which the flow of blood has ceased, and cure it with another treatment while it is still healing.
Chapter IV.
On the Cure of Hydropic.
We have already described, in the division, of the kinds of hydropic water and the signs of each kind, and how to cure it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of algae, and it does not approach the species of tympanists or the species of hyposarcous water, because water is deadly.
And when you have already cured this species of hyposarcous water with medicines and do not continue your medication, then consider, for if the hunchback has already been cured or is affected by another hydropic illness, similar to that of coughs or abdominal pain; then be sure to do not cure it with iron, because there is danger about it.
If the patient's abdomen is of exuberant virtue, and there is only ydropici there, not child nor old, then the way to operate on him is that you raise his abdomen between your hands, and the minister squeeze his stomach with his hand, pushing water out of the opening of the penis, and then place a thorn in this form:
It should be two-pointed in length, of acute point at the tip with a thorn; however, it must be made small by little and little, so that during the operation he does not enter into the abdomen, and so that his hand is not cut.
And if the generation of ydropici is from the intestines, because when you are going to make the incision at the navel for three times the distance between the openings, in the right side over the penis:
But if the generation of ydropici is from the abdomen, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three times the distance between the openings:
And if the generation is from the hernia, then your incision should be on the right side.
And do not make your incision over the ribcage where you want to operate, so that the excess fluid does not run into that place.
And then pierce the instrument all the way through, and then insert it into that incision, and raise your hand with the thorn between the line and the syringe, and you squeeze that out; and if the quantity is one finger or less.
And then pierce the syringe into the place where the thorn comes out, and that is a place of water. And then extract it, and insert an instrument which has this form: is made of thin silver, or of brass or of ivory, which has in the end a small hole, and on the sides three holes: two from one opening and one from the other; and it is sharp at the tip as a feather, so that sometimes:
And at the end of it is a ring, because when the instrument comes out into water, then that momentary amount must be evacuated, because if you evacuate less than that, then to a great degree your patient will suffer from the resolution of his animal spirit, or five things will happen which are approaching death.
However, if you evacuate that second amount of the virtue of the water and according to what your dispositions are about the virtue of the pulse of the patient and the goodness of his hands:
And then extract the instrument, and keep the water which causes this because it is as much kept by the knot as the hole that is over the syringe from which it comes out, and tell me how you make this come out according to this way:
And then repeat the instrument to the other day if your patient will take water, and extract from the water a small amount, and pour it over the hand with care, and keep away from making mistakes until the water is used up completely.
But if you are afraid of the patient, and pour out a large quantity of water, then do not worry about it sinking in the sand, and moving it with soap in the bath, and waiting for a long time; and be careful that it is healed with drying medicines.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the intestines and the abdomen are extracted from the water according to what I have told you before.
Chapter LVI.
Of the treatment of children who are born with the places of urine not piercing.
Some of the children are born from their mother's belly and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is a straight hole or not in its place).
So then cut with piercing as soon as they are born with a small sharp knife according to this form:
And then tie one of the small copper nails in the hole and bind it with string for three days or for four months:
And when they want to urinate, let them stand up and urinate; and then return them.
And if you do not stop the copper, it is possible that the urine which goes on its way should not stay in this lock.
But the hole of the child who was born with a straight needle is to be treated with a copper nail, as we have said, for several days until it grows larger.
But those in which the hole is not in its place, then cut it as we have said, for some days until it grows larger. For if this hole is straight and narrow, then the sperm cannot come to the mother according to its shape, and it is a disease that does not last long.
And the way to operate on him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then raise the head of the penis with your left hand for its extraction, and cut the tip of it with a sharp scalpel, or cut some from one side, so that the top of the penis looks like the hole, and the hole falls into its place according to what is covered.
And be careful that in your operation of the flow of blood, for as much water comes out; and stop it with water that stops the bleeding, and heal the wound within.
Chapter LVI.
About the treatment of the foreskin on the head of the penis and its corruption, darkness, and black color and adhesion of the foreskin to the penis.
This condition occurs in the foreskin on the head of the penis and is a thick spot of flesh.
And of this there are two types: a malignant and a non-malignant.
Not-malignant, then suspend with a small amount of oil and stop it up completely; and then put it under a bandage wet with Egyptian ointment; and then wash it with soap every day until it is healed.
If the condition is malignant, its color is black, then prepare a cauldron for the operation and cut it, as well as its roots.
But if the condition is in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and one part of it is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then prepare to cut off this foreskin, for at the beginning it may be soft; and when you cut that off, do not worry about whether it has been cut or not.
This condition also occurs in the genitals and in the foreskin and its corruption, so prepare to cut off all that is already blackened and is beginning to corrode or has already been corrupted; and then line it up with water, which is mixed with flour from a bread cracker, and three times boiled, and sieved.
And then heal that with other treatment until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then prepare to administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
Because the healing of an old wound is at two places together, so it is with a flow of blood and a plague when it is corrupted.
If the head of the penis is corrupted and completely destroyed at that moment, then prepare to insert a copper tube into its meat so that the urine passes through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those who have a foreskin, and all around it; and when adhesion occurs because of plague or pus) then extract with a sharp scalpel so that its tissue is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to cut them neatly, then cover that you cut any cause of the head of the penis and the prepuce, and so is when it is thin, very weak is pierced by its subtlety slightly.
Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a dry hand so that it does not stick to anything else.
Then it is cleansed with vinegar and salt, where it has hardened.
Chapter LII.
On the Purification of Children and on the Cure for Water That Occurs in Circumcised Individuals.
Circumcision is not sufficient for continence; it is also not useful if we do not use our will and if the people for whom it is done cannot carry out this operation easily, we should prefer another solution that does not endanger them, since their salvation is more important.
Therefore I say that the young people do not circumcise themselves in any of the free countries, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with the scalpel and the scissor; and they use the ligature with fidelity and incision with the ungul.
And I have seen all these methods; and I find no better purification than with the scalpel, with the ligature that is used in the purification with the ungul, because the thread of the prepuce goes away from above, since it is tied to two tunics, and the ring remains above, and it is easily forced into another incision, and certainly causes pain. And in the purification that is done with the alpece, which is done with a scalpel and is done digitally, of which the barbers use, it is not secure to cut off the end of the male member, because it easily enters into its tunnel.
But in the operation with the ungul, very carefully, you may damage or corrupt your operation. And the thread of the child is short by nature, and it has not been seen in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this one.
But of the purification that is done with a scalpel and a ligature that is used, the goodness, experiment shows me that, because the sharpness of the scalpel is so sharp that it is like the sharpness that is left; and therefore, when you press your hand in proportion to two sharpnesses, and then cut according to a comparison at a time; and it is made by compression of the ligature on the shape containing the thread of the penis from all sides, and with which there is no mistake for all.
And the method of the first operation is that you hold the child upright, if it is one of those who understand a little, so as not to have to put your hand on the ungul at all, and let it go inside the next day.
Then let him rejoice in all this method that is possible for you, so as not to receive his intelligence. Then let him stand between your legs, prepared to cut, and not be standing; and hide the scissors in your hand or on the other foot, so that the child does not see those or any of the instruments.
Then put your hand on the penis of the child and blow into the thread, and pull it in until it is out of the head of the penis, then purify him from the filth that has accumulated there.
The shape of the scalpel for purification, this is the shape:
If the two extremities are not sharp and the other two are, so that there is no gap in the claw, and the length of the two sharpnesses is like the length of two handles joined together.
But the error in purification is that it easily escapes the thread completely, or part of it; so you should cut it off.
Then extend that from your hour with your ungul in front of the place where the thread is attached, and cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your ungul, then take it out with a needle and cut it.
But if they have passed three days, and leave that the penis is swollen up from outside the place where the thread is attached, then let him go inside that it is released with caution, and extract it with ease, and cut it according to what is prepared for you.
Then keep the head of the penis because it will not be good for him.
And then cure that child with water, so that the plague of the dusts is removed from him, which we have mentioned in the treatise of the dusts.
And if it is cut from the thread according to measure, and it is cut from above; then water does not enter into him.
But also cure that child with water, which we have said is good for healing.
Chapter LVIII.
On the Cure of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to fear or cold, or due to poison or food, and similar to those we have mentioned in the methods of purification in the division.
And if the urine is not dissolved with water which we have said is effective on the patient, then let instruments be prepared to extract it, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and very thin, so that the tube of a pen be like it in shape, and the canal of an goose feather be like it at its end; and the canula should be thin.
And the method of introducing the urine into the instrument is that you tie the ligature in a loop and hold it in the end of the tube by a good knot; then introduce the extremities of the ligature into the hole of the ring, and cut with scissors if there is any superfluous thread in the tube, but first introduce it into the pipe with force. E aprop fa le siringuam sub la pelle del malacot e lahoras se le furca per lâ€™apertura del sed de la malauta e lo lagrima i solucita la urina en le furo o en le boder de la canula, e lahoras es liberta.
Then place the bladder over the back and the penis in the water with oil; and oil it with olive oil, and wash it off.
Then introduce the syringe with ease into the opening of the penis, and double it up above; then push that down to where the bladder is; and if it reaches the empty cause, and does not reach further according to this order, but goes to the one in which the pain is felt, and no further according to this order, but stops at the edge.
And then extend the sack slowly by the small furrow, since urine makes the furrow wet.
Then bring out that one with the help of a bladder and use a syringe to stop urine from flowing and use a syringe inside until the bladder is emptied and the patient also feels relief.
Chapter .lxxxx
About the quality of bladder emptying with a clyster and similar instruments that agree to water.
When a bladder ulcer or abscess develops, or there is an injury that affects the urine flow, and you want to distil water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clyster, and this is how to do it:
but on the outside it is silent, so it is closed. And in that one there are three passages: two of a size and the third smaller.
In the beginning it is a tight place, in which water is gathered and kept there depending on how much fluid is accumulated; when, however, some cause makes it flow out, let it be driven away, and when it is expelled far away, according to the clyster used, naphtha is applied to its folds from the sea.
So then, when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clyster into the moisture, and drive away from it the water that is gathered in the folds; because moisture is driven into the cavity of the clyster.
And then insert the end of the clyster into the vein according to what we have described in the syringe; and then drive away the moisture with the water you force out, because that moisture goes back into the bladder and into the patient's leg.
Shape of the subtle clyster for the bladder to be emptied, and this is its shape:
It is made of silver or lead, which has the shape of a small feather, and place a smooth cup inside it.
And then prepare the bladder for emptying and pause in it the moisture you want to dry out in the bladder, and then place that one between two tightly bound sacks of wool, and heat up that moisture on fire.
And then insert the end of the clyster into the vein.
And then place your hand on top of the bladder with the moisture to be stretched downward, so that the patient does not notice that moisture has already reached the bladder.
Maybe you do not have a bladder present, then take a rope and make a circle of it; and pierce that one completely around its whole circumference; and then insert the double sack tightly into those passages, so that, if you want to introduce moisture or medicines, you can pause them in that water that you want to deliver, and then pour out and urinate.
And then you tie that one onto the instrument and make it empty into the bladder, and express your hand inside until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lxxx
About extraction of pee.
We have already discussed the division of urine and its cure with medicines, and the difference between urine generated in the lungs and urine generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of each one.
We have also mentioned the urine from which surgery is performed, and its section.
The urine generated in the bladder itself is that which remains in the bladder.
And I have described that one with evident and concise explanation.
So then I say that urine generated in the bladder mostly passes to children; and the signs of it are that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient's leg rubs against it, and sometimes it is seen as a stream; and at times it is seen as drops.
And it cures the children of that bladder in about twelve years; but it is difficult to treat in old age. Maybe in young people it is half-cured by water because it belongs to them.
And from that one, of which the urine is greater and treatment is more difficult; and if it is little, then it is opposite to that.
So then, when we come to the treatment of that bladder, cover at first the beginning of that bladder with a clyster, because that fold contains some veins; for that fold sometimes prevents the introduction of urine into the bladder due to the investigation of it.
And then place the patient' leg in the clyster and tighten it, and move it up or down sometimes; or let it jump from one place to another.
And then insert the end of the clyster between your legs, and place the feet apart from each other so that the bladder is emptied at the ends;
And then turn it completely inside out.
So then, if you feel the urine in that space, stop for a moment with your section on top of it.
And if the urine does not pass from that space with your treatment, then stop and rub a little olive oil on your left side; if the patient is a child, then half of it goes in; and insert that one into his buttocks. And turn over the urine until it stops from the side. And turn that one little by little up to the neck of the bladder.
And then press that one with your hand on top of it, and expel it out to the sides after stopping it with your section.
And order the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and order another minister to extend his genitals to the sides with his right hand, and to hold the cord that is left of the genitals, from the side where the section is performed.
And then insert the spit that is held in a place where this one has been cut; and here is the shape: And then cut between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, but at the back of the left side; and make the section over the urine that comes out of it, and hold the cord that is on the right side of the genitals, and make the transverse section; so that the section outside is wide and smooth inside according to the amount of urine that comes out, not more, because the pressure of the cord in the middle of the genitals stops the flow of urine.
And you know that there is no end to urine from which it comes; because the excretion of it makes it difficult by water.
And that urine is like a lion's roar and round, and its excretion is less.
So then, if it is the one from which it comes, adjust it to the cut.
And if it is not that one, then stop for a moment when you touch that one, or tighten it with a gentle gesture, and make the end of it wide enough; or insert the other end of the instrument from its curved end.
Maybe you cannot touch that one; then increase the pressure slightly, and if you see a flow of urine, cut it with vinegar that is three parts water.
Maybe if the urine is more than one, at first you drive your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then cut it over that one; and then drive a small amount of water; and seemingly cut it if there are more than two drops.
And if the urine is very thick, then you do not know how to cut it with a large section, because it causes pain; or because the location does not allow you to cut it properly.
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe juice and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place over that bandage soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rosin oil and rubbing water, so that it may fall off quickly.
Then return the patient to their bed, and do not remove the bandage before the third day.
And when he has removed it, apply water and oil to the area, and treat with oil of rhubarb and oil of stinging nettle within three days that it may be healed.
If however there occurs a blister which is hot and painful, and if it resembles the appearance of the stone in the bladder, and if (for) it is known that it is a stone by its passing urine, then insert a small needle into the blister and extract the stone, since if it remains in the body it may cause the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and in opposition to any sort of medicine, water that may bring about healing within.
And during the hours of treatment, you have both cushions and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
And if the pain is slight and is in the middle of the foot, and if it is stuck, and there is no urine passing, then heal it with water that I have recommended before you cut it open, since three times tried to cut it open has resulted in a section; and if you pour water on it, and if you push it with an iron needle quickly, this is the way:
Of a triangular shape, sharp, stuck to the foot.
Then pull firmly, and leave it at the foot of the bed so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the foot, piercing easily so that the piercer comes with the pain. Then turn the piercer in your hand a little at a time in that small pain, and you will pierce the piercing of it from within so as not to pierce it on the other side, since the urine is soon absorbed.
Then place your hand on that which is painful from the side of the foot, since it is twisted, and if it is not out, but urine passes, then the patient is healed.
Then if this treatment is not suited to you for any reason which prevents it from being used, then leave the pain, and another pain on top of it. Then cut over the pain in that foot between two bandages. Then extract it. Then remove the bandage and rub the stone which is in the wound.
It is not necessary to leave the pain, but to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage on top, since when the bandage is removed, the pain leaves the body, and the heat returns to its place and hurts.
And with water you need to raise the bandage on top, or to return it to its place from which it was taken, and rub in this way when you have removed the bandage.
Chapter LXVI.
Of the extraction of the stone from women.
Pain in women is rare.
Then if you have any of those pains, then the treatment is difficult, and three times tried is prohibited.
The first is that the strong woman should be cared for.
And the second is that you do not find a good woman who reveals if she has eaten when she is a virgin, or if she is married.
And the third is that you do not have good women who know this skill, mostly the operation with your hand.
And the fourth is that the place of section over pain in women is far from the place of the pain, so that you do not fear a large section, and in that it is fear.
Then if necessity compels you to it, then cover yourself with a good woman, and few are found.
Then if you are deprived of that, then seek a good and subtle woman, or present an old woman who is good at this art, or a woman who in this art has a good beginning.
Then present that, and order her to do all that you will send her by inquiry about the pain at the beginning; which is the cause that she regards if the woman is a virgin, then cover herself with her dress and desires the pain.
Then if she is taken, then remove that from her by inquiry, and then order her to inscribe on it.
Then if she is not a virgin, then order the old woman to insert her dress in the cavity of the foot and rub it over the pain, since she places her left hand on the bladder, and rubs it with good pressure.
Then if she is taken, then cover her with gentle care from the opening of the bladder to the side of the foot, and rub it gently until it reaches its end.
Then inscribe on that position of the cavity above the heel at the end of the foot which touches and rubs it gently until it reaches its edge, and the saying from him is not taken back from the pain with a sharp knife in hand.
And the section is little at the beginning; and then insert a needle into that section, and if you feel the pain, then adjust the section according to the quantity which I know that the pain will stop.
And you should know that the kinds of pain are many: for some is little and big, and sharp and dull, and long and round, and have thorns.
Then you know how many spices there are in it so that you can mean what you want on it.
And if you want to see a stone, then adjust the bitter spice in the third place, and return to your operation before the pain is out.
Then prepare yourself with the instruments which he mentions in the extraction of pain in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
Then if you want to see a stone, and you know that the expulsion of the stone is by means of oil which is applied to the cavity, then do not repeat it; leave the pain and do not extract the stone, for the bladder will die strongly. Then heal the wound.
Then when the sharpness of the pain has passed, then return to your operation before the pain is out.
Chapter LXVI.
Of section over hernia.
Hernia that is moist is only an addition of moisture to the skin, which is left with the membrane containing the four, and it is called the ciphac.
And some are in the proper pannicol which is natural preparation for the separation of the four, so that it may be different from another four, and it is the membrane of the gene between the ciphac. It has been said to be water, but it is not water.
And the generation of this hernia is by means of the removal which happens to the genes, so that it is poured out at them, and some times it is caused by impact made on the genes.
And this moisture is without spots, for the color of it is either declining to yellow or bloody, or ropy, or black fermentative, or watery white, and this is the best water.
And the roots from which this addition of water comes are these: for if it is in white cypress, as we have said, then the effusion is gradually declining a little towards length also with a cow's head figure, and appears the genitals, for the moisture contains that of all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper pannicle, then the effusion is gradually parted from the cow' s head and so one man estimates that it is another cow' s head.
And if the moisture is between the genitals and white cypress, then let him measure by degrees.
And as you wish to know the color of the moisture in the effusion that is gradually parted from the middle of the genitals, then judge from this that which emerges on the outside of it; and according to what comes out within it, judge from that which is within it.
Therefore when we come to the cure of it by means of fire, then let us command the patient that he be poulticed if possible, and cover his body completely.
Then let him be raised on both feet a little higher, and place some linen cloth under him.
Then place yourself on the left side of him, and command your minister to extend his staff to one of the two sides of the genitals and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
Then take a knife and cut the genitals from top to bottom near the place of the penis.
Then the section should be made according to a rectangle distance from the line that you should follow from the genitals, until it comes to white cypress all inclusive.
Then cut it out, and observe, and keep for yourself that you do not cut into it; and your cutting out from the middle, if it is the greater part, should be suspended to the cow' s head most commonly, and carefully examine the cutting out according to the quantity as possible.
Then pierce the white cypress completely with a wide piercing, and extract all the water.
Then separate the two parts of the section with your fingers, and extend the white cypress to its extremities; and do not touch the genitals all inclusive, and cut the white cypress in that way that is possible for you. Then cut it with all its parts or in pieces, and mainly its middle part, for if you do not scrutinize carefully the cutting out of it, the water does not return safely.
And if you prepare the cow' s head from that place outside of its genitals at the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white cypress, return it inside, and then adjust the two parts of the genitals by suturing them together, and then treat those as well as other illnesses until they are healed.
And if you suspect the cow' s head is corrupted by some other illness, then let us know if any vessels are missing from what is suspended, and extract the cow' s head, and then treat that with the water that we have said.
And if the water is gathered into two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
Then let us wash the wound and put it into linen immersed in oil or rose oil; and place another linen the which you have dipped in vinegar and oil, and spread that over the genitals and the miracle of the belly; and place folded linen cloth and powder on it, and tie this linen by two knots.
And then let there be placed two linen cloth and be pressed by a carmine according to this shape; and let the extremities be tied with twine or wet wool, and be added to the stitching in the breeches of the trousers, and one extremity take from the buttocks between the other, and another extremity take at the part of the crotch, and two extremities over two pillows that are left and two extremities over two sides, and let all the stitching be adjusted in the breeches of the trousers.
And some hernias are treated by means of cauterization in place of section to make it; and this is because you take cauterization with a sharp knife and cut into the genitals, and ignite according to what we have counted. Then let us take cauterization according to this form: And it is arranged in the Greek letter shape.
Then pierce the white cypress completely, and let it be ignited until all moisture is exhausted.
Then extend the white cypress with your fingers, and cut it with your fingers, and cut it by means of ignited cauterization; and cut it according to what is possible for you until you remove all of it; and keep away from fire that the cauterization does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more safe and more distant from the flow of blood than the operation by section; and better than operation by section.
And if, at the hour of section or cauterization, or at the hour of blood flow, you feel opposition, then let us know that you cure any opposition by means of that cure which is said to be used for it.
And if the patient is a little bit afraid, and does not hope for the second operation because of its horror, then let us administer piercing according to what I have said here; and it is when it is certain that the hernia is watery.
Then let the patient lie on a high table, and pierce the effusion in the lower part of it with a wide piercing, and pause the piercing according to the length of the body.
And let that opening be broad so that all the water comes out.
Then place the cow' s head on the part where the pain is felt and leave it there for a while so that the water comes out completely. Then treat that part where the illness has been healed.
And if opposition is made to the effusion of water at that hour when you pierce: and if it is not done by this means that the white pannicle in the orifice of the disease causes opposition and prevents the entrance of water, then let us know that you introduce into the illness a small or instrument with which to extract the water from the drops; or adjust in the contrition of the disease a tiny one.
And know that the water returns and is collected in a vessel over a period of time or after certain events; and when it is added to, then pierce it according to that method which we have said; for the patient will experience its days then.
Chapter LXIII.
On Section on Hernial and Treatment of It.
Know that in the section on this hernia is feared to become worse in the most important cases; therefore, I see the dismissal of it and being saved by the better one.
And I remember the operation when you were young and the specific properties of effusions.
Therefore, it is said that the effusion rises in the parts where the genitals are joined and is caused by certain causes: either because of acute excess of fluid or because of impact.
And it is the color of the abcess according to the color of the body, and does not turn red in pain, and it is a hard abcess.
And a very heavy abcess is the one with a dark color, which is not hot to touch.
And some swellings are caused by the inflammation of the arteries, and by the swelling of certain veins.
May be that which is caused by the swelling of the arteries is recognized when we squeeze it with our fingers, and does not hurt when touched.
And that which is caused by the swelling of a vein does not disappear when touched with our fingers.
And it is possible that this kind of wound be cured by incising the genitals and opening the veins, drawing out the white puss, freeing the vessels from their attachments, cutting off the suspensions, and removing them; cut off all parts of the genitalia.
Then if the flesh is already hardened on the injured part, remove the puss and cut off that part.
And if there is adhesion for some reason of the puss, or between the vessels, then remove all such adhesions and cut them out with a round incision.
May be if there is birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then cut off all that flesh and remove the puss from it as well, as I have said before.
Then, when your operation is finished, fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and cover it with a wet dressing; and apply another cure as soon as possible until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the treatment of hernia, which is with vinegar.
It is an abcess wrapped in a wrapper resembling the softening of the testes, and it makes difficult exercise and walking on the patient's back.
And in the treatment of this illness, fear is felt for the cause of which there is a recollection.
However, it should be remembered that I have spoken above about operation.
And I say that you should place the patient on a high table; and fasten the suspensions of the testes to the hips with cords; and tighten those other servants that you have, and spread them out vigorously.
And cut through the vein with a sharp knife in a transverse direction across the vessels where they are visible.
And then remove all parts as I have said above in the removal of arterial blood vessels which are in the temple.
And then fix one of these needles in such a way that the thread is doubled, and tie it at the first place where the wound occurs, and tie another at the back end. And cut those in the middle place by a transverse incision according to the length of the body, and remove what is corrupted and putrid.
And then cure the wounds with a different cure from those which you want to heal, in order that they may not become infected by another cause; for it is not good to have them infected.
May be if all the veins are cut, then the testes are removed or cut off from them by means of the incision of the veins, so that they lack nourishment because of the cutting of the veins, and wither away; or cut off so that there is no reproduction to them.
Chapter LXVI.
Of the treatment of inguinal hernia.
The arrival of this hernia is by means of an incision which is in the navel extended over the belly from one side to the other, so that the intestines escape through it; and when they break out at either end, they pass into one of the intestines.
This break is either from the navel or from the exit; and these two things occur for various reasons: either by impact, or by noise, or by movement, or by a sudden elevation of some kind, or by resemblance.
And the sign of this is that it occurs little by little in the course of time, and not suddenly; and it is an abcess inside the navel because it compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is that it occurs when there is an incision in the navel; for at the beginning there is a violent pain suddenly; and it is an abcess with various appearances near the navel, and the body bends itself away from the navel.
And some swellings are caused by the navel rope being pulled out; this is called inguinal hernia.
And some swellings are caused by the navel rope being pulled out; and some become tight within the navel, and cause great pain, especially when it is pressed upon.
And in the treatment of these kinds of illnesses, fear should be felt because it may cause pain.
And the method of operation for this illness is that you should return the navel rope to its cavity if it comes out; and place your hand under his belly, and raise the feet high.
And then tie the rope which binds the testes to its ends, and cut it all over longwise; and place two sharp knives on either side of the incision as you would like to cut open the navel.
If the incision according to the quantity which is possible for you, that the puss of the hernia should come out.
And then remove all the puss that is left from the binding of the testes; and cut off the white, hard part of the navel.
Then you should cut off the testicles, and cut away the white navel between them; and cut off all adhesions which are on the back of the navel.
And then tie the testicles to their ends and stretch them out; and extend the white navel in its place with the help of a servant, and raise the testes on either side of the incision; and command the servant that he should hold them steady while you remove all adhesions which are behind.
And try to find out if there is any cause of the navel being wrapped in the hard navel. May be that you do not understand it; then cut off that navel from below.
And let one of you go to the back of the testicles and make a section so that blood will flow out, as we have said before in what we have spoken about.
And let one of you bring a soaked wool and put it on the wound; then apply the thread that we have mentioned (and some white threads are cauterized, which we said should be cut from the wound to prevent bleeding, because such threads might occur) and let the thread inside so that it falls in itself.
May the bedding be delayed, then water is boiled and placed over it, and let it be placed on that area so that it falls as we have said.
And let one of you treat the wound with the other treatment for wounds before healing.
Chapter LXVI.
About Hernias with Wind.
In this hernia, there is nothing that has been cooked for the treatment of it as well as fire.
And the first said that it should be done as we have mentioned in the hernia that is with wind; which is to say that you take the vessels and place them over the area gently; and let them dry in their place while applying water to the apoplexium gently, so that the vessels fall.
And treat the wound as we have said, so that it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
About the dropy that happens in the ankles.
Some break in the ankles as we have said, and let go of the place.
And do not seek any cause of hernias at the pubis; and if you do, it is little; and return to it in all hours.
May the time be extended with it, then a small crack occurs in the hernia through which the intestine is pushed into the hernia; and such occurs because the hernia is stretched, and let go of the place; and it becomes soft and there is an apoplexium, and let go of it.
And the treatment of it is as follows, so that it is preceded by the narration of it.
And some are treated with fire according to this way: and that is when the patient's buttocks rest on your lap, and let go of the place where the apoplexium breaks out with a section according to the amount of three fingers.
And tighten the white hernia that is under the testicles so that it is uncovered.
And let one of you put your hand on the prominent place of the navel, and let another put his hand on your belly.
And let one of you cut the two prominent places at the end of the hernia on the navel, and tighten one to the other with a stitch.
And let go of the end of the hernia thread, and do not cut it from the navel, nor do you extend the string, nor any other cause as we have said in the treatment of an enterstinal hernia.
And let that be treated with the treatment of wounds, and when you cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound before it is healed; because the hernia contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
About the Softening of Testicles.
In some men, the testicles are softened by water because the flesh between them is softened, and it is not advisable to pay attention to it.
Then it is necessary for him who is treated that he lie down according to his back, and tighten all the hernia that is softened over the navel; and let two lips be adjusted to the stitch.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened hernia with three or four cuts and with a firm stitch.
And let one go between the stitches; and let it be treated by the treatment of other wounds before healing, and let the threads fall.
Chapter LXIX.
About Castration.
You should know that castration in our law is prohibited, except for a cause that is considered legitimate by me; I remind you of it in this book, and it is not necessary to remember it unless there are two ways. The first is that it should be done because it is in the interest of medicine when it is asked about the treatment of that person upon whom it occurs; and the other way is that we have a need for castration of other animals for our benefit from them, as well as from donkeys, and horses, and pigs, and creatures similar to them.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting off or by cutting open and making a section.
And in that which is done by cutting off, the way of the operation is that you cut off the animal's tail between the legs while its genitals are softened and made to hang down; and let them fall. And let those who are near your hand hold them so that they are relaxed and do not appear to be loose when touched.
And in castration that is done by cutting and making a section, let the animal be held so that you can press the hernia of the testicles with your left hand.
And let go of the suspenders, and cut over any two threads with a section so that four are cut.
And let those be cut who are ahead of the others. And do not place any cause on the hernia, but put a subtle hernia over the veins.
And this way of castration is better because it is done by cutting off, which strengthens the hernia so that there is no desire for the beast to mate.
And let one of you treat the wound as we have said before it heals.
Chapter LXX.
About the Treatment of Hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is due to two ways: the one is because the space becomes narrow in the hernia of the testicles; and this is the figure of a woman between two testicles, which is a man's body with two genitalia.
And some of those who have it pass urine from the hernia of the testicles.
And in women there is one kind: and that is when the woman's space is between two testicles, which is a man's body with two genitalia.
And the treatment is of three kinds: of the two men and one kind of women. And let those muscles be adjusted so that they do not give off an unpleasant smell, and let them be treated by the treatment of other wounds.
And in the second kind of men, from which urine passes from the hernia of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation.
Chapter XXI.
About Lancing and Muscle Emerging due to Women's Causes.
A strong lancing is adjusted to natural causes before it becomes strained, and it is not advisable to pay attention to it; and some women are enlarged in some way so that they become strained as men, and others are not aware of it until intercourse occurs.
And let those who have too much lancing be held with your hand or a towel and cut it off with a sharp knife.
And do not end in the section, primarily on the head, so that it does not cause bleeding.
And so care for those with plague until they are healed.
And so care for those with plague until they are healed. May meat that is born in the abominable place inside them, and it is strong enough to emerge from the openings according to its shape as a cow (and therefore we should not eat it even if it appears to be tender), and so let us avoid eating it when we cook, and let us cure those with plague until they are healed.
Chapter .lxxii.
On the treatment of plague.
Plague is that a woman's hymen not be pierced, or it is a small tear. And whether it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is by a plague that preceded it, and such is caused either by raw meat or by a subtle poison or spice.
And it is caused either in the womb of a mother, or in her breasts, or in the pus above her, or in the pus below her, and you forbid intercourse and taking on a wife and childbirth, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the moon's phases, if the opposition is obvious, then let it be done; but if it is not obvious, then do so with an eye chart or a mirror.
But if opposition is by subtle poison, and it is between the two lips, then let you cut and break them.
And let you place on the two lips powder, and place the eye chart or mirror in front of both eyes simultaneously.
Let the woman be on her back with her legs spread, and let you stretch the two lips with force until that subtle poison is broken and opposition is overcome.
And let you take wool and send it in oil and place that on the spot, and rub it with a man every day so that the spot does not become hardened.
But if the poison is thick and spicy, then let you rub it with a spice of laurel or a leaf of mint.
But if opposition is by meat, then let you suspend that with oil, and rub it.
And if those medicines do not stop the flow of blood from a wound, then apply them with honey and an egg yolk, and clean it, and adjust it to white wine.
And let you administer a wide, thin, and cold drink so that the plague does not become hardened.
Keep it for seven days and then administer warm water.
And so is cured by another means of hardening before it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the womb during the birth of other animals, and then you should rub according to this method. But if it is by a cold apoplexy and that which is in the womb does not oppose itself to being turned into an animal in some way, then rub it with a cold compress.
Chapter .lxxiii.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and a red boil that occurs in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids are those of the openings of small veins that cause pain constantly; and if they are old, then they are painful.
And I have already said in the division about the spices of those and their properties, and so those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
So say that hemorrhoids and boils when they are in the womb and do not appear to be a problem, then do not apply cure to them.
But those that are in the opening of the womb over which there is no feeling, these are the ones that are cured.
And let you put the woman into a wrap of garlic and stretch her with force, or with a sharp razor, and rub those areas with razor blades.
And let you sprinkle on those devils the powder of a spice that stops the flow of blood from one of them, and so with mint and similar to these.
And let you weigh her body for an hour, and then let her lie in hot water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then let you boil her in a soup of mustard and peppercorns and similes.
And let you take flour of almond and make an paste with honey and vinegar, and apply it to the two breasts.
And if the wound is healing, then let it be so; but if not, then let there be an attachment to the two windows, and make incisions on the breasts.
And let you take wool and dip that in the juice of coriander or the juice of hawthorn or the juice of grape, and apply it to the spot; and so heal the spot.
And so heal that which needs to be healed.
Chapter .lxxiv.
On the accidental piercing of the skin in the womb.
Small boils occur in the womb, sometimes causing pain and a lapping-like motion, ulcers, itching, eczema, and other small boils. And I have already said about these malignities and the spices of those and their properties, and their cures in the division.
And I will tell you in this treatise about the piercing of those things that occur in the womb when they are piercing, and if you wish to know how the operation is performed.
Then consider whether the pain of the boil in its beginning is acute with inflammation and fever, and sometimes it becomes hard, and if it opposes itself to that which pierces it, then do not pierce it, but heal it with oil that soothes during the maturating process until the acuteness of the accident passes.
Then let the woman lie on a slab that has two slabs; and support her with her back to the edge of the bed, and stretch her legs away from her body, and open her knees apart from each other, and lie down on a sheet next to her.
And the midwife should go from behind and administer the instrument with which she will pierce the opening of the womb, the form of which will be determined in those cases that it is appropriate to do so.
And when you want to administer that instrument, let you stand behind the woman and insert it into her womb, and let the tool enter the womb only through the womb opening, and not through any other part of the body. But if the tool is larger than the womb opening, then let you place powder on the texture of the womb opening so that it prohibits the entry of any instrument into the womb opening.
And let you place the instrument on edge and turn it upside down, and let the minister hold the instrument, and let him pour out what is inside until he pierces the opening of the womb.
And when it begins to emerge, and it is touched with the hand, and it is hot and damp, then let you dry that part of her with a sponge.
And when the pain of the piercing subsides, then let you rub that part with a wet sponge dipped in rosin or green oil, and so stop the bleeding.
And place the womb above on clean wool dampened with water, and let it be bathed in hot water until it becomes calm.
And then it should be treated with a hot liquid that softens it until it heals.
Here is the translation of the text:
If the pus is inside the swollen mother, then cover it so that you are forbidden from the cure of it, maintaining care of what I have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach the midwives how to treat a pregnant woman who has a fever according to the figure that is not natural.
A necessary cause is that the midwifery woman learns in the beginning of the natural childbearing process by the signs of it, and that when you see the woman express herself at the openings and desire to smell the air, and above it is enveloped by what is on her during the part, and quickly realizes the pregnancy of it, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and that is the odor of it over her head, and the second one is suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then cover that the woman's belly is shaken so that the embryo does not move heavily because when it moves over her head, it sends the second one down, and it is rid of those superfluities with good preparation.
May that which is the other of this part is not natural or useful, because when the embryo is expelled over its feet and the back of it is expelled in front of its head and its feet, and the mother one, or on its chest, that is to say, Or is expelled the head of it and the mother one, or over its belly, and strongly it is turned on its chest, and resembling the figures of it are not useful.
A necessary cause is that the midwifery woman is wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guards against error and deception.
And you should show all these figures, and what is the meaning of them by this, that it stands on it.
When the birth is expelled over its head by natural force, and that is violent over the woman and difficult to give birth to, and sometimes the virtue of it is already debilitated, then do this: or that the women have it, and vaporize the conh of it with fenugrec oil and with odorous humors.
And the midwifery woman enters between its legs and cuts it with a small instrument, or sews it with her finger before that moisture comes out of it. And press the woman's belly in until she expels the fetus.
May if it does not expel, then know that the woman is choked by mucilage of dill and mucilage of fenugrec with a bandage.
And order it, and command that it be choked, that is to say, that it coughs; and put the mouth of it and its nose for an hour, because the fetus often comes out then.
And if the two more of the fetus are choked at the beginning, then know that you decrease those with small force. May if it does not obey the instrument, then the woman is placed on a table and her feet are lifted up, and the table is moved down on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall because of the shock.
And if the two more are not turned in and killed the fetus, then separate those and extract the fetus or tie the neck of it with a thread and extract it with equality, because that often comes out.
When the fetus falls on its feet, then you push it in, and turn it around, and draw it, and take hold of one of its feet and stretch those little by little.
May if it is expelled within the thighs, then you command that it be squeezed, and make it cough with a bandage, because often comes out if God wills it.
And if it is not choked with the water that I have told you, then return the small fetus little by little until you make the second natural figure, because that often comes out if you press it lightly.
And if it is forbidden with all the water that I have told you, then take of the oil of mint and of dissolved gum, and pound all of it in a mortar with good pounding, and pour that over the belly's conh, and the pus of the woman' s lower abdomen. And then make a cut in it in teuz water, until you achieve the hypochondria.
And when you see that the openings of it are lengthened, then make it sub-fumection of mint and sub-pause to it. And when you make it sub-fumection for an hour, then place it on a table, and then make it cough and extract the mouth from it, and remove that, and press the lower opening of the belly with light compression because the fetus often comes out then.
The expulsion of the fetus from side to side with one of its hands. Be prepared to reduce the mother's head, but if you cannot do that, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the ground, and hit those with a violent shock, and administer to her with the help of oil and water that I have told you.
And if the childbearing has come, then make it lie on a table, and study the reduction of the mother, and extract the fetus according to the figure that is natural, and make the woman cough and command her to squeeze herself until she is choked.
The expulsion of the fetus on the chest, with the legs opened wide, and the belly of it is above the mother' s two arms. Know that the midwifery woman has the fetus, and then turn it little by little, and do so easily.
And when it is and often comes out, then stop over the conh of it with oil and water that I have told you.
And then command that it be squeezed little by little, and when you see that the fetus is coming out, then make a cut on a table with your head inclined to the right, and order it to be choked; and make the woman cough with a bandage. The exit of the foetus was prepared on the left side.
When the delivery of the mother has begun in this manner, consider it, and immediately insert your finger into her to expel the moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended above its neck, immediately insert your finger into its mouth to prevent it from being held and dying.
Then deliver the fetus into its cavity before pausing for a moment, and order the woman to squeeze her legs, and the man outside will remove it with ease, if God wills.
The exit of twins or a multiple birth. Do you know that twins are born with closed eyes, and sometimes three or four, some are five, but only one is alive, by nature, not alive.
And consider that if they are multiplied, there is one second, and they are separated by a cut, distinguishing between those entering into the navel of each one; some vaginas are also naturally opened, and some are not closed, just like this one when a fetus is delivered naturally. And sometimes the vagina is closed in this manner, as if it were a wound.
And if they are difficult to deliver and come into being in the way we have spoken of natural figures, then you should take care of them in this manner as well.
And if the midwife is subtle and causes water to break in a subtle and late manner, and is ingenious according to all figures according to which it is prepared by God, leading to salvation.
Remember that it is formed in the mother's womb from embryos, and some are aborted.
Some have been formed in the mother one, two, three and four times, five and six; and I have already seen that a woman gets six abortive children, while another does not get any at all. This is due to the measures of the glorious wise men.
And all this is covered up, that which is in the science of the midwife, for how light it is to a small child, and then stops at water, and then stops again, until it comes out.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you take care of the dead fetus by means of water, which we have spoken of in the division of medicine, and does not come out without force, then consider whether the woman is of sound virtue or not, for it is a loss to her through accidents for which she is responsible.
Then the woman should be placed on her back, and her head should be inclined toward the ground, and the cushions under her legs should be raised.
The minister should hold her by the two parts, or tie it to the ground, so that its head does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the mother with a cold water, with a mixture of mint and fennel seed, and with a soothing balm.
Then the midwife should massage her feet with the oils and balms, and then sit her comfortably, and then find the place where the fetus' nails are located.
Then find a convenient place: then consider whether the fetus is prepared to be placed on its head, and immediately fix its nails in its holes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or leave it with its beard, or in its collarbone, or in places close to its ribs, or leave it with its hair.
And if the delivery is on her feet, then in the penile, or in the midriff of the ribs.
Then she should hold the nail with her right hand, and place it in the middle of her back, and move it to one side, or to another, and then fix it in a convenient place, until it reaches the reason for doing so.
Then place and fix another nail in it, or the third one if necessary, so that it is not extended, and only to follow its order, and not to be broken, except for the purpose of fixing it properly.
And let the delivery take place in this manner, so that the relief of the woman is provided for, and the reason for doing so is given, and not to be broken. And if it is necessary to remove anything, do so with ease when it begins to come out, as if it were a tooth coming out.
Then in the water between them that the extension is softened; and if any part of her is held back, then consider that the midwife should massage it with oil, and then move it slightly and turn it over with ease, and not to be broken.
And if the exit of the fetus is delayed, then the nails should be exchanged between places where it is not extended; and do so within that time when all the fetus has been delivered.
And if the woman's back is turned to the other, and it cannot be reduced by means of a girdle around her; then consider that she should be wrapped in cloth, and then extract it within that time when all of it has been delivered, and cut it off at its joint.
And so you can deliver the other side, and the two feet.
And if the head of the fetus is large, or comes out with the girdle during delivery, or it is in the mouth, then consider that you should enter between the spines with your fingers, and cut off its head, or use an instrument called "lunate", the shape of which will be like the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter where this is mentioned.
And it seems as if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then consider that you should cut it with a knife, or take it with a lunate, as we have spoken of; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head has come out and is tied with a girdle to the neck, then consider that it should be cut within that time when the moisture that is in the feet is flowing.
And if it is not complicated, or if it comes out without difficulty during delivery, then you should cut the head as soon as possible for yourself.
And if the child in the womb is aborted or is in the uterine wall, then consider that you should pierce it within that time when the moisture that is in it begins to flow.
And if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of it is light, and the direction in which it points to the mouth of the mother is also light.
And if it is tied to the belly, then consider that you should extract it with a cloth, which you have wrapped around your body, and cut the belly within that time when the water that is in it begins to flow.
And if the other members are held back and turned the head, then the midwife should move her left hand; and if the mouth of the mother is open, then consider that you should place your right hand in it, and fix the nail in its hole, or in its neck, or in its palate, or leave it with its hair.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an apoplexy that occurs as a result of water, then consider that it should not be broken open; and before that, consider that you should administer a good amount of moist, hot water. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with water that softens and moistens.
And if it is done on his side, then if possible let it be cut open: and let the water that we mentioned when doing the incision be administered to him.
And if this water is not possible, then let it be incised in the feet, and let it be removed.
So that you do not leave any cause inside for the second time.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer the water that we mentioned for the cure in the toes of the feet that happened from the mother.
And if there is a discharge of blood, then let it be washed with sterile water and administer the other cure.
You have already seen a woman in her womb who had a dead fetus, and on that spot another pregnant woman was delivered, and on that spot another dead fetus was made. It happened to him after a long time an apostema on his belly; it swelled inside so much that he began to have fever.
You were called to treat him, and you treated him for a long time, and the plague did not become fixed.
Then you stopped for a while because of some causes of strong attraction, and he passed urine, and it passed after a few days, and he passed another urine; and I was very amazed, for in the womb there is no urine.
Then you began to think that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Then you cured the plague, and I extracted from him some bones, the existing one in their middle, and I have lived in such a way for a long time, correct his little arm.
And I did not consider it strange, but because in water there is science and aid to the sick that you administer by means of medicine.
Of the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Shape of the turn that is opened on the mother's belly:
This is the shape of strength in which the wings are joined, with two turns at the two ends of two feet. But this turn, however, should be less sharp than the previous one, and it should be made of wood or of boy's foot.
And the length of each foot should be a palm and half, and the width of each is one palm and a little more; and in the place of two feet there are two adjustments of that metal' s feet which are already closed, the length of which is less than a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two ditz or a little more.
And these two additions should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened by those two prescribed turns.
Another shape, similar to the previous one but less sharp and more light:
Made of wood or boy' s foot according to its appearance of strength. But in the end of it there are two additions, and their length is a palm, and the width of each is two ditz.
And when you want to close the mother's belly, then make her lie on her side with her legs hanging down, holding water between her thighs. And then open your mouth with the instruments joined together according to the quantity you want of the impression of the mother' s mouth, so that she makes no noise.
The shape of turn that they call the children:
Shape of turn that pushes forward the fetus:
Shape of turning that turns the head to the side:
And it is put together with two pincers at the end, sometimes, and in some women it is made long sometimes, following this form, sometimes, and with these same pincers sometimes, according to this shape, sometimes, and with the pincer that has the teeth on the back part of it, so that it is incised and held. Small form of turning:
Form of a single turn with no point:
Form of a double turn with no points:
Shape of a spatula with two ends by which the head is cut off:
Form of two spatulas broad:
All these instruments are exercised, and when they are multiplied in quantity those spices and are prepared by the artifice, how much less is used for their operation and how much less do the men who perform it.
And you don't need to open those instruments again, because the necessity for them is not excusable.
Of extraction of the second:
When the second child is detained, then if you command to the mother that she hold her breath and tighten your hand over her mouth and over her nose, and if by doing so it is forced out, it is good.
Then, if not, you take a bowl and pierce the lid with a thorn and pour in that water and let it be in the mother' s mouth, pressing and drawing, and drinking and smelling, and using the acrid and bitter and fragrant herbs. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl, and pour over the fire.
And place a funnel of cane in the mother' s mouth, and hold it there so that the vapor comes into the mother' s cavity.
And then he forces him to sneeze again, as we have said, and the second child is driven out quickly.
But if this cure remains and is not driven out, then order the mother to dip her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of mint water, and insert it into the vagina, searching for the second child; and when you find him, force him out little by little, following the route that we have described; and if he adheres to the wall of the womb, then remove his hand from there, and place the other hand on the mother' s belly, and if the second child is stuck, then stretch it a little with your fingers. Then he will be moved to the right and left easily.
And if her mouth is stopped up, we have already described the cure with sneezing and with the water of herbs.
But if this child is not driven out by all the means that we have described, then do not make him fall into the mother' s mouth again, but keep him in your hand and wash him with warm water and a little bitter herb; for he will be scorched after a few days and will be driven out.
But when it is cooked, it will have a bad smell to the head and to the stomach, and let water be given to the mother; then administer the water with smoke and with care.
Some of the Ancient Herbs are already prepared for smoking with nose-clearing and fig leaves.
Form of a device by which the woman is smoked, suitable for the retention of blood and for the second child:
Of wood or iron.
And the sharp end be placed in the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and smoking be done on the embers of the fire.
And hold that in which is consumed that which is consumed by sub-fumigation and repeat the other.
For cure of the child's anus without perforation.
Now let the children eat and their anuses not being perforated, which already have been made subtle and oiled. Then let the midwife pierce that child's anus which is made subtle; and else, pierce that one with a sharp instrument, and be careful that it does not touch the urine.
Then place over that wrinkled anus a wet and oiled cloth; and treat that one which is consumed by sub-fumigation.
May be if you fear that it has been oiled, then pause in the throat a tube for some days, and prevent it when the child will want to defecate.
And already has happened oiling of the anus because of consolidation of plague or of abcess; then let that consolidation be scarred, and is cured with water which we have said for the cure and the rust.
For cure of the fistulas which remain.
The fistulas which are in the entrance let them be pus-filled and grossness which they have near to the anus or in the space of the one entrance.
And it is a fistula or a clyster.
And with that grossness is old and runs of the moistening that it is white or subtle putridity, and some are of those fistulas which penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known because of the water which is discharged from them by exit and because of windness; and some use the exit of the patient, and it is discharged from them with great force.
And so of those fistulas some are known in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the meat of the vulva; and so of those that penetrate into the junction of the thigh and into the nose of the crotch.
And the water in which is known the fistula that penetrates into the anus and not, it is that you place the thistle that is said endic in the anus, and entrometas tries subtle to make fire or to pierce in the fistula when not it has been made.
May be if in that there is prudence, then entromets in that try subtle of rust or of hair of horse within which you feel the try or the fur in the thistle.
And if you do not feel that one of all or do not make discharge of the exit of any cause of excretion or wind or windness, thus have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat yourself to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vulva, then the meaning of it is completely urine of that one and prohibition of it at this time that the place to medicine be consolidated.
May be if it is penetrating into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and pain in the circulation of the crotch, then know that the meaning of it is that the try has penetrated here if it is not prudent within the bone, and pain in the circulation of the entrance; and that it has putridity always; and that it does not value in that medicine, nor is consolidated with a wet.
And in all those fistulas that penetrate there is not complete cure, and the cure of those is work and futility of the leaves of medicine over which they are closed.
May be in that one that is not penetrating and not old, there is expected cure with iron according to what you have recommended, and the water which it has already heard and has proved.
And it is that the hernia is between your two legs over your navel, and raises the cambas of him within them, the spaces are leaned to the belly of him, and entromets tries of rust or of fire if it is in the fistula prudence, then know the place where the try penetrates.
And if that one feels the hernia turning the navel, then let you enter with the thistle that is said endic in the navel.
And if you feel in the thistle try already has entered discovered to penetrate, another water that you feel between the thistle and that one is made subtle or of meat, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that one, because it is not in that cure, thus have said.
But nevertheless others say that it is cured in some men.
And of the medicine with which is expected improvement in him is that you ignite cautery subtle according to the width of the fistula, thus has preceded, and enters that one in the fistula that penetrates turning the navel; and then repeats that two or three times within that you know that they have been made close all those fisticled meats which seem to feathers of goose of white.
Then treat that one with wet wrapped in padding within that all those meats which are close, and then treat that one with medicine of the engendered meat and consolidating, and if it is cured, it is good; and else, then it is not cured in any time by another cure.
And if the try enters and does not penetrate within the thistle which is in the anus, and between that one and the try which is a subtle meat or of sub-fumigation, and sometimes the fistula in water which severs the surface of the navel, then dry the navel from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if it has been dried by the fire, and is in the fistula within that section penetrates to the place where the try ends, and through the try is liberated and catz.
Then separate those fisticled meats which are assembled to tube of goose of white and not it is the rumbling of any cause.
May be if flux of six times that it passes between you and your operation when you place those meats, then the milk which is and the instrument that is cauterizes with fire or with acute medicine, because cauterize with fire adjusts well to two: so is close of those fisticled meats which are close, and excuses from the six-fold exsecution of the moistening.
Then treat that one with wet wrapped in padding or in three-fold cause within the place that it is wet and bristly, then treat the plague with a wet meat which engenders and consolidates.
And those medicines in which there is strictitude and exsecution; when it has been restored then it is cured and you do not fear recurrence.
May be if the fistula already has penetrated within the navel of him and it is long of the surface of him, then entromets the thistle in the anus and asks that one.
And if the try is hundred and between you and it is subtle of meat or of sub-fumigation, and is approaching to the penetration, then is not operation in him but according to a trusted way and of hope.
The cause is administered in him by three ways: or that cauterize it thus have said; or that dries it within that you reach the cavity of him for so that you can enter with the needle and the cure is likely; and do not process that one to the section so that it does not injure the urine-containing bladder, and that you obtain the section in order that it has been made subtle; and then separates those fisticled meats which are separated within that section for the navel, thus have said, or with the try or with another instrument of extreme point, and then dry those meats which are separated within that section for the anus, thus have said, or at the fire or with acute medicine, and then separate those fisticled meats which are separated in the section for the navel, thus have said, or by the use of a needle; and then treat that one with water which has been said because it is very good medicine; or that prolongs that subtlety and makes that one which dries within that section for the anus, thus have said, or at the fire or with acute medicine, and then separate those fisticled meats which are separated in the section for the navel, thus have said, or by the use of a needle; and then treat that one with water which has been said because it is very good medicine. And in some cases the fistula is closed according to this method: it is when you introduce the needle into the fistula and then into the surface of the body with the thread and on the margin of the buttocks, then take a small piece of flesh from the tip, which is done so that the needle can be used to prepare the bodies according to this form:
and wrap it in a small piece of cloth or insert it; and then take the needle into the fistula before it reaches the cavity.
But if it penetrates into the margin of the buttocks inside, then you take the needle out from there as you insert it in the buttocks; and you pull out the tip of the needle and join the two ends together, and cut them off, and leave it for a day or two, and when it is healed over, put the needle into the meat, which is between the two ends of the thread, and let those pieces fall.
Then heal the wound so that it is solid and healed.
But if the hole in the fistula is not penetrating, then do so with some preparation on your part, but do not do it while piercing the skin, because you may hurt yourself; and then heal that hole so that it is healed.
The form of the needle with which the fistula is split: its curve is sharp and the other end is blunt, so that you do not hurt yourself when piercing, because it is unnecessary, and in this way.
Suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows into the incision of those.
Emorrhoids according to two methods, because they either lie between the buttocks resembling carbs, or those are covered with a kind of rash. And they are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times, and it is a lot, and they only occur outside the buttocks, and on the edges of them.
But those that are on the outside of the buttocks according to two kinds: because some of them have little moisture, from which yellow or a little blood flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the cure for those that are inside the buttocks is that you order the patient to lie down and press, so that the buttocks burn, and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you cut yourself and hang them on nails or whatever you have with your nail, then make an incision in those spots where the skin is.
But if the nails do not have them because of the moisture in their skin and its softness, then take them with a sharp or jagged knife, then cut them off with tweezers, and sprinkle some powdered herbs on them after cutting them, so that they are at those spots instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter about cauterization. Then heal those with the other cure, so that they are healed.
And if the buttocks do not obey to leave, then tie the patient with a knot in the rope that is slightly small, and wash them with water from the buttocks, which obeys to leave easily when tied.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is due to your hand, or because you hold them with a needle, and make an incision in them, and then heal them with water that has been said to be healed.
And if you want to make a small incision, then prepare the suturing of them according to this method: take a needle wrapped in cloth and insert it into the needle and then take out the tip of the needle and join the two ends together, and leave it for a moment on its own; and then tie the thread tightly.
Then let it rest completely, leaving one of them uncut, so that the excess blood flows from it.
Then place a cloth spread with olive oil or wax on the buttocks, and place that one on the buttocks, and order the patient to rest. Then leave that one alone until it has healed; and when it is fallen, heal those with oil or with another cure, so that they are healed.
And since those are old and do not respond to that medicine, then know that they only become wet and are hosted by them from above, which prevents their solidification; and then heal those once they have been consolidated.
Then stop them with a fierce pain, more intense than the first one that causes pain, and then heal those once they have been healed.
Be aware that the cure for dysentery is to pay attention according to the color of the body resembling a carrot's tip, and it is done in the whole body, and mostly in the parts near the feet and in the mouth, and through them, you feel pain.
Then know that it is done according to the end of the clause, and if it has been cut with scissors or a needle, and its roots have been removed; then heal that one.
And if you want, cauterize the second according to what is preceded in the chapter about cauterization.
The small warts are small, sharp, round lumps on the surface of the body, and some occur in children.
The cure for them is to stretch them or to pierce them with a needle, or to make a cut in the part where they occur. And if you want, cauterize it according to what has been said, with fire or acute medicine.
The wart is a small, swollen lump on the surface of the body, and when the finger touches it, it feels like a frog's bite, and it occurs inside the skin.
The cure for them is to take a pen-point or a quill, and make it hard, and place that one over the wart where it is contained within the circle of the pen's points or quills; then turn your hand around so that the blood reaches the wart, and then heal it with blood that has reached it.
And if you want, make water with the iron or lead according to this form:
The cut of the pen should leave a small slit in it, silent (if not piercing), wrapped so that its tip is covered by it, and its revolution turned.
And if you want, cauterize the wart according to what has been said before in the chapter about cauterization of athy.
Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give a cure.
Some are given a cure of silver or lead or melted or malleated; and some are given by small instruments or large according to those which they administer, because the one that is administered in the cure for children is small; and of those which are administered in the cure for adults, the cure is large.
The shape of the cure, large and small:
The end of the pen is turned upside down in the place where the bag is attached, so that it is wide according to this method: and its distance from being attached.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
"And be the bag in which the medicines of the beast's bladder or sheep's wool are placed, and the thread of it is a palm."
"And be pierced by two slits as it isrevolved, and if the space between the slits is of different thickness."
"And insert it into those slits with a strong thread of pure honey, which shall be of such a quality that you fill the bag with the medicine, which shall be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and guard that it is not too long or too short."
"And raise the patient on their back, and elevate their legs in their direction and place a bed or a mattress on which the men can rest; and apply the tip of the cautery to olive oil, or to white honey, or to mucilage of fenugrec or something similar; and insert it into his arse with ease, and the minister shall squeeze that bag with two hands and squeeze it vigorously so that it is evacuated in the bag all of what is inside the cautery; and then remove the cautery and the patient's legs be raised to the wall."
"And if the medicine compels it to defecate, let him hold as much as he can; and if he sleeps for an entire night, it is a sign of recovery."
"But if you apply the cautery to the patient' solute of the stomach and his defecation is cured, then repeat the cauterization until he is healed."
"And if in his arse are painful hemorrhoids or blisters, then be the cautery very subtle and a lion among the cauters used to treat children."
"Of cure for wounds."
"You have already said in the division of the cure for plague patients that it is fitting to free them, and I say likewise the cure of those with fever and the medicine according to the complement."
"Therefore, I say that plague patients are diverse according to where they are formed and according to the place where the plagues fall."
"And the causes by which plague patients are formed are: as a result of drinking water infested with pestilence, or incision with a blade, or stab with a lance, or a spear, or an arrow, or something similar to these causes of plague."
"But the plague that is in parts of the body are: as a result of a pestilence which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the breast, and similar to these causes of plague."
"I am also recommending the cure for some plagues so that this reasoning and regulation may be applied to the other plagues."
"I shall begin with simple head plagues, for the recall of the composed will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
"Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and is not a fracture, consider: if it is from drinking water infested with pestilence or something similar, and he has already taken three cups of water regularly, and there is no delay in doing so; and extract from him to the third day according to the quality of his virtue if there is no other cause that prevents taking water, more so if the plague is caused by a simple fever.
"And be the water drinking of the opposite of the infected part; and keep the patient from repletion, and from eating and drinking anything heavy."
"But if there is no prohibition of any cause, then reduce the food intake and do not bring him close to meat or wine."
"And pause for the plague, if it is caused by an apoplexy, use olive oil or wine in which is added saffron."
"But if you are sure that it is caused by an apoplexy, then pause for the plague, if it is recent; and do not change the powder I have recommended to apply to the feet."
"And if the air has already changed that one, then pause for a while inside and be healed."
"But if the plague is great or is caused by incision with a blade or something similar, and his lips are not adjusted for suckling, then adjust those according to how I recommend sewing them."
"But if the plague has already broken out from the bone and is not reticent in him but only a small suspension; then incision on that part and immediately cure the plague with medicine and restore flesh to its place from meat; and order the patient that he be fed on wine and bread, and similar things to those mentioned above, as long as it is possible."
"And if the codena decays and does not adhere to the bone, then you shall incision all of it and pour vinegar on it; and immediately cure that."
"But if these plagues are an artery or a vein through which the plague flows and does not heal with medicine; then inquire about that artery, and if that artery decays, then incision it with a blade or ligature; and if necessity compels you to do what I have said not to conform to, then cauterize it so that the plague is eliminated."
"But if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is slight; and you shall apply this powder to those parts, for it has already been mentioned that when the air changes, those particles should be applied."
"And the way to prepare this powder is: take a part of olive oil from the separated water; two parts from dragon's blood, three parts from an unknown cause; all mixed together and well shaken, and if there is a plague filled with pus, it should be bound by a good constriction on that part so that it does not spread; and be boiled with the powder."
"And return that paste to dust and leave it there; and do not stir it while it is like that, for it will be broken down and the medicine will be eliminated from it before it is healed."
"And never apply this oil alone; but when you have separated water and dragon' blood, and when there is a plague of pus, then apply it."
"And do not delay this operation in great plagues; but when the plague is recent and its sanc has not been altered by the air."
"But if the air has altered it, especially in summer, then do not apply this powder to those parts; but cure them with water that I have mentioned; and apply oil to those parts that have been infected by a different method, as I have described above; and cure them with another cure before they are healed."
"But if you get a fracture plague in the bone, which is small, then extract water from it by gesturing."
"I shall direct the cure for head fractures in poison."
"Of the neck plagues."
"But if a plague occurs in the neck, there is a difference in medicine; and between a head plague and one in the neck, when it is simple."
If the nerves in the neck are already injured or damaged, if they are nerves, not in the limb but rather should be avoided treatment that would cause great violence to the blood, thus with the cauterization and cauterizing that it is infectious and similar to their wound nozo on nerves and contrazen that. And do not pause on any part of the plague causing all the fever, for the substance of nerves is a fever and the continuity of it is to the brain, which is pus or all the members.
And if it is to be cured with light medicines, so with it is to wash with warm water, some mixed with rose water or non-rose water, and to cool when washed with warm water and the other herbs are minimal according to this method, and to wet with moisture.
But if the plague is great, then administer sutures or clamp their lips, and then cure that with dust inside so that it is healed.
But if the plague is deep or happens in the pus lower split, then pierce that in the place most affected.
But if the plague is already an artery and a constant flow of blood, then separate or dry that out, or cut that off, or cauterize that if necessity forces it to water.
But if the spine of the neck has already been injured or all of it, and the veins of the neck are safe, then you adjust the lips of the knot to suture over the cane of the neck and do not touch that; away make that even and reduce that over its natural figure, and then strengthen that with a straightening, and leave that for several days; and then cure that with the fire in which there is stypticism and excitement within so that it is healed.
But if the plague has already caused damage to the bones, then strike that out, and if there are fragments of bones, extract all of them that you can; and what is not covered with a dressing, leave it inside so that the plague can corrupt it, and be separated from it and the excrement be washed away.
And if the plague is recent then sprinkle on that powder which I have recommended to you. But if the plague has caused a fistula, then cure that with water from which the memory will come to its right place in its capital.
If it is a knife or a lance strike and sometimes the depth, then consider whether the patient's breath is warm when they are heated; you will know that the plague is deadly.
And if there is not depth and the plague is recent with the patient' blood, then you pause in it at first hour with powder, and do not strengthen that so that the blood does not remain stuck in its depth and returns to the body, and then pause on it with an attractive wetting, and then take away that twice a day.
And if the wetting is not to you present, then you pause in the orifice of the plague with a cloth so that it sucks water that contains moisture; and make the patient sleep on the plague so that it runs water that is in it.
But if the plague has passed three days or more and there is no happening of spasms or tremors of the heart or stricture of the air passages, and sometimes other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the plague is over; and then cure that with water and with the other treatment within so that it is healed.
But if the healing of it is delayed and has already been opened for a long time, then you will know that it has already become a fistula; then cure that with its capital.
And if the plague is by incision of a space or a knife and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with water which is preceded by a suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if the bones have already been injured by pre-incision and they are already separated, then you will know that those bones must be extracted; if they are not separated, then you will know that they must be extracted. But if they are not separated, then leave them inside so that the plague can corrupt it, and what is extracted from it is washed away.
And of the other accidents of plague on other members, the treatment for healing is the same as that which we have said.
Of the belly plagues.
The disposition that happens in the womb is either great or small or slight.
A small disruption is difficult in another way, and if you do not cover the area of their invasion with your body for a long time, because it opens and thickens because of the instruments of them, then the reduction of them is very difficult.
And so the best disruption is slight, because in that one is not difficult to reduce the intestine, but rather is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And you will know that the suture of the belly is in four ways, two sutures are common which are added to the other two sutures of the other plagues of the body.
And two other sutures that communicate with the others, but only two are proper to the belly suture.
I recommend to you all of them in exposure and explanation.
So I say that when the plague is small and causes an invasion of the intestines through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in two ways: either by the slowness of the disruption or when the intestine is inflamed by the cold air.
And then, when it is like this, you will know that you must cut off the intestine, rather than submerge a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or take it into cold water, and to spread out the intestine on it so that the inflammation is resolved.
Some of them cause water to become violent, and it is better than warm water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And if you see that the inflammation is resolved, then you will know that it is better to moisten the intestine with water which is slightly heated and not too cold because by water it is washed away more quickly.
But if the instrument of healing does not come into contact with this treatment, then you will know that the disruption must be made with a small instrument, and to incisions or bleeding on it.
The first treatment is the best, when it is proper that there is not an incision, and it is not necessary to dry out by occupation;
As for the instrument, let us see its form:
The one end of it is sharp and the other not-sharp, and its extreme is subtle, and it is not the subtlety of a knife, but rather it is slightly blunt.
And if the plague is widespread and causes an exit through the intestines, then you will know that their reduction must follow their natural form, in their own place, if possible on it, because it is better.
But if the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you will know that you should lie down on your back, and pause your feet higher than your head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you will know that you should sit up, and pause your legs higher than your head.
And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your intention and your consideration at any time so that the part where the plague is is put out than the other.
Then you will find that you serve them in great plagues and in lesser plagues.
And in small plagues, pause what you are preparing, and let the minister be between your five fingers, who has the whole rupture to his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and let him uncover from that to another who sees the suture with a certain cause, let him see if he can see.
This is the common way of suturing: one in which you take the needle, or choose according to the quantity of the width of the plague; and let go from the end of the rupture of the little finger, and tighten the needle one, or other than you cannot place faith in the two ends of the knot, leaving the knot between the splits inside, while you make that enter from that split; and you have already added the two ends of the knot and four orders.
And let go of the needle on double thread in the circuit, and some veils of two parts together, and let add the two lips and the plague by addition properly; and let go of the thickness of that little finger and let another needle stay there with double thread, and let tie that with a knot properly; and do not cease to do so if necessary until you have completed the whole contract of the plague.
And let the smaller needles be between delicacy and thinness, because the smaller needles slightly cut the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult in the knot, so that by what means they will be small in thinness and thickness.
And do not see that the needle is fixed in two adjacent ends of the knot proper, so that flesh does not slightly cut and the plague hides before its consolidation.
And do not be prolonged with suturing so that the plague does not hide from consolidation.
And insert the ends of the needles so that they do not remain hanging on the patient's side where he sleeps; and you will pause over the suturing powder spread from all split, which holds the ends of the needles; and let those be inside so that you know that the plague has already been consolidated.
And these spices of suturing with needles in what way is most suitable in small plagues, because it is sufficient in the suturing of them a needle or two or turn those inside out.
The second suturing is most appropriate: and it is that you serve them with four ends, of the knot and two extremities of the cipher, in a veil, with the needle with which you are faithful wrapped around in delicacy and thinness.
And when the needle will have penetrated these four ends, you reduce the needle of that starting split from which you begin, so that faith retires there from the upper split of the plague, so that the suturing is like a second skin on it, with which the skins are tight.
And pause between each suturing the quantity of the thread of little half.
This suturing makes men weep.
And at this suturing I saw the plague that was accidental to a man in his belly who was infected with a scalpel, and it was the rupture of the major plague of a palm, and it came out of the intestines inside two palms from the bottom of the intestine and it was the disruption of the middle member; and then I reduced that afterwards than the intestine had been broken by the plague for xxii hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of xv days or more, and I healed that one and it was cured; and then he vomited by motive of anxiety, and it is spoken about its dispositions.
And the other metges had judged that it was not cured; and for a miracle it came about, because I did not heal that one with a mouth, because it was in a place where the mouth was not attracted nor any medicine, but I paused over the plague a knot of two veils every day and washed thoroughly with water from honey into that until it was healed.
And you would direct two special sutures proper according to the narration of the Bible.
And it is that you begin with suturing of the knot, and turn the needle from the split outside to the split inside.
And so with the needle that penetrates in the knot and in the same way it continues to all of the body, and lets go of the end of the cipher in which you have inserted the needle; and let the other end of the cipher penetrate from the split inside to the split outside in the other extremity of the midsection.
And so when you have finished that penetration, then do another penetration in that meteyssa extremity of the midsection from the split outside to the split inside; and let go of the end of the cipher that is in this place, and let the other end of the cipher penetrate from the split inside to the split outside.
And make that penetration with your own hand with which you made that penetration in the cipher in the extremity of the midsection that is in the split inside until all that penetrates.
And then you begin again on that side and cut that with the end of the cipher in the other place, and take out the needle from the knot, and turn it around to the other side and pull out that one from the knot that is on this side.
And do so a veil and another, and make a veil between them until you have cooked all that there is behind according to that example.
And the sum of this way of suturing is that you sew with a thread on which you sew the hair; or, that you sew the cipher once on the part of the extremity of the knot, and that you let go of that other veil until it is complete.
And the second special suturing that is recommended for you, and this is spoken about it from you and because of it that you sew that other half with which some medicines sew that, or, that you add all the split to its own half in a way convenient according to nature; and they apply one end of it to the other by turning it around, and there it is done according to what you recommend.
Then you will find the needle in the extremity of the midsection to your side of the split, and make that penetration inside in this place, and let go of two ends of the cipher; and then turn the needle around and make that penetration from inside to inside in two ends of the cipher.
And then turn those caps around, and make that penetration of all the splits from inside to the outside in two other extremities of the midsection that are on the opposite side.
And this way of suturing is better than common suturing slightly, and it is suturing that I preceded with a reminder.
This is the speech of Gualia
And they called him some name, and this is the way of suturing in the belly that is corrected with two needles, so it is that you insert these into any one of them a needle, and begin to turn the needle from there that is right for you, and make that penetration inside the other place according to the sutures of those who sew them tightly.
And you know that when rupture is in the middle place of the belly, then the suturing of it is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
May the treatment of plague be judged as such for other plagues.
Which causes it to be when you have caught the plague recently before that air alters it, and reduce the intestine and knots that and apply poultices of ash with care, then pause over it with a smoldering ash.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over it with a smoldering ash and apply poultices of ash to your body until they make a hard crust and fall off, and are hardened and healed; and treat it thus as for other plagues, until it is cured.
May also if you do not feel the medicine, then pause over it for a while, since it begins to tickle, changes places every day, and teaches you, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in various situations when the plagues are simple.
May also if you fear that the plague will spread to the main members, then dip a lion's wool in oil of quality or oil of rosewater, and pause it over the affected areas, leaving gaps between them; and place ash on the skin.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, because it is often caused by the presence of something there, then apply a black stinging oil to it, and more so if the decay has reached the intestine and there is an exit through its cavity.
And know that those who are fat have a slower recovery than those who are lean.
And it is difficult to recover from it because the intestine called "gegunu" does not receive plague recovery that enters it completely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and to its size, which is small, and to its proximity to nature of nerves.
May also if the treatment you are applying is for the plague and you have caught it recently, then return to your normal diet gradually; and treat the intestine by reducing it in length.
May also if it has passed a long time and is now yellow or black, then apply poultices of ash on the area that has turned black, so that blood comes out; because in the intestine there are veins and arteries.
Then insert another thread into it and pause two extremities of the thread hanging from the edge of the hole through which the intestine passes, so that above you is relieved the attraction of the intestine towards the plague forum; therefore, your body does not emit the stink of the plague.
Remember the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it will spread to some people; why? Because I saw that one which was infected on the right side of the stomach with the stroke of a lance, and it was the plague of the lower part of the stomach, and it had gone back and had become a fistula, and it discharged its contents and became warm and windy.
Then you saw that the treatment of it was not yet established for its healing; but gradually apply it inside until it is healed and the area is hardened.
And you saw that the area had already hardened, then hold the patient in a prone position on his back; and do not let him eat anything that is harmful to him or drink, and exercise him in water and sweat.
And some experienced people have said that when the plague occurs in the intestine and it is small, then tie it up according to this method: and that you take a piece of cloth of large size; and adjust the two ends of the cloth to the opening of the intestine and pause one end of the piece on them; so, when you press it on them and tighten it, cut off the tip of it, because it adheres to it and does not dissolve.
Then pause another piece next to the first one, and do not cut it off to make more pieces according to the amount of plague.
Then return that and bind the plague; and let those heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient at all.
It is possible that the intestine becomes thin with a thin thread attached to it, because it is like a needle; and you take the end of those threads, and if it is blunt, then wrap the end of the thread around it, and thread it through a needle, and bind the thread to the needle; then thread the needle into the thread tied to the intestine, and return that disruption.
This method of stitching with a needle is only another way, a second path of trust and hope.
May also if the plague is large and widespread, especially if it occurs in a small intestine, because then there will be no healing for it completely; and it will not be healed at all.
Of treatment with ash and of the fistula.
Do you know that every plague and pustule is called a ulcer when it is inflamed and swollen; and it does not harden and dry up completely, but gets bigger all the time, and does not heal, then it is universally called a fistula and we call it ash.
And the fistula, according to its truth, is a deep, persistent, white wound that does not hurt, and which is concave like a ulcer; therefore it is called "rizat", that is, pain.
It is in wet men, which gets bigger; and the moisture is discharged after a few hours. In some cases this moisture becomes dry, but it is little, and it is thick, and subtle.
It has all of these causes, and its treatment with medicine in the division.
And so you know that the treatment of the fistula is carried out by surgery.
And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the veins, arteries, or nerves, or the intestine, bladder, or any of the joints, and from similar members.
Then those of these fistulas that are like this way are the difficult-to-heal plagues, which do not receive treatment, and employment in them is work and ignorance.
May also if one of these fistulas is too deep not to reach those areas that it reaches, and you wait for healing; then you try to cut or pierce it, and if the fistula responds well to treatment, and you inquire about it.
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a soft probe because lead has the ability to lift and curve the body's framework from the tortuosity.
And if the fistula is causing horrible pains, then it is not possible for you to examine it gently.
And then crystallize the orifices because the moisture that you use to lubricate the orifices will run down from the other orifices.
And then inquire carefully, according to which method you are able to know if here there are os or nerves, and it is the cavity of the fistula distant or near, or is a fistula that has only orifices and it is over that completely as much as your strength permits, through your interrogation, and which interrogates the patient, and the invention of the pain should be by your pressure on the area, and similar to the meanings and accidental causes to the inflammation.
And when you have considered all those causes at rest, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent near fistula or a sore, far from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the areas whose knowledge you have and say.
And then dry the fistula according to what is said in front of it, and this water that is in filtration and corrupted meat, and this that is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the teeth and similar things, and cure it inside so that it is healed.
And if the fistula is of great depth, and it follows rectitude, then cover that which you cut off completely as much as possible, and clean it from all its corrupted meat; and then administer hot water wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those inside the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood by feeling.
And make this water, which is wrapped in some drops of sharp medicine, that it corrodes completely what is rotten in the cavity of the fistula because of the corruption.
Then restore that with cleaning those which generate healthy meat inside so that it is healed.
And if it is not healed by water, then you cauterize that according to what has been said.
And if the cause of the fistula is a bone and it is necessary to investigate it, then you inquire and dry it according to what has been said, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as I have said.
And if the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and blackness, then you cut that which the corruption is completely hosted; and then cure that with water that it passes inside so that it is healed.
And if it is not healed and gushes blood like a jet, then you know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption; and then you discover the reason of it and clean it carefully with the last powerful medicine, and restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, then well it is; and if not, you know that the corruption is in the depth of the body, which has not been reached, and then to you there is nothing but to investigate that.
And if the bone is corrupted slightly, or if it is possible for you to throw it, then you throw it with small scissors that are convenient for water.
And if there are many bones, then investigate carefully the extraction of all of them, and leave none cause for you by your strength.
And if you have any difficulty with the cause of the moisture and in its incisions there is no fear or mistake, then incise those limbs or meats if they are here, and free the bones.
And if you have not prepared for cutting the bones of your patient, then pause on the edge of the wound where you can find the edge, and leave that inside which is surrounded by those bone limbs of meat and limbs, and keep the wound where it has not been consolidated, and force the section that you have incised in your operation.
While preparing, if you fear, pause on the edge of the wound immersed in tri-salt water, or an Egyptian ink, or one of the strong unguents, because when you introduce those limbs, and the bones are separated from the ablation, and the attraction is relieved.
And if it is a large bone like the spine or the pelvis or the thigh, and this one of the bones is corroded and blackened, then clean that only behind with a sharp knife after that is completely corrupted, and then restore the wound.
And if the water that is corroded by it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the core of the bone, then it is necessary to close that which has been cut completely inside the place where the corruption has entered, and then heal that which has been consolidated.
And I repeat to you the water that I give to him for this man in his crotch so that he pauses it on himself and assists you in your operation.
Focus on a young man for age about 30 years, who suffers pain in his crotch, and the split is large inside that is wrapped around the inner part of the body so that it reaches the crotch, and this is matter of inflammation with great inflammation, and he does not have external cause.
And then focus on the time for this error of the measurements so that the inflammation is moderate, and he returns to him the matter quickly, and the swelling becomes large, and the cure returns to him quickly inside that the pelvis is inflamed, and the fistulas form in all orifices which all have pain and moisture in the body.
And then a large number of doctors were called for him because there is pain in it.
And I saw the crotch of him and the matter running from those orifices by a large path; and his body was completely stiff, and its color was yellowish.
And then I inserted my attempt into one of those orifices and brought the attempt to the bone.
Then I searched carefully all the orifices and found this coming from all parts of the crotch.
And then I hid myself and incised on one of the orifices where I discovered a piece of bone, and removed that which was corrupted, and it was dry and blackened and decomposed; and one part of the crotch had already penetrated into the pelvis.
And then I closed the wound that was discovered by me and prepared the bone that has been discovered.
And I considered that it is not in the bone but that corruption which I have removed and cleaned, and I had already removed it completely.
Then I resumed the healing of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
Then I returned and discovered the bone again according to the first discovery, and removed that which continued to corrupt with the bone.
And I closed the wound that appeared to me after that corruption, and then I resumed the cure and healing of him, and it is not restored.
And then I discovered the other side and did not cease to cut the small bone little by little, and performed the healing of him with a small knife, and then I continued the cure and healing with medicine, and it is completely healed, and it heals.
And it is not necessary repetition in the operation of him and his section but for the disposition of his foolishness and because of the weakness of his tolerance and fear of death, since he falls into all hours by superfluity of vomiting syncope bad.
And therefore it is healed by entire sanatio, and there is nothing in the place of hard os carne; and is made good the disposition of him in his body and returned to the virtue of him; and is turned about in his dispositions and does not make opposite him in ambulacio or injury in any cause.
But if the os eminent is in place of the body has already been cut, then do so that you cut it this way: and that you take care and tightly tighten him at the end of that eminent os, and order a person who extends that tightly; and stops that tightly with wool made grosser than the first tightly; and bring that tightly onto the flesh that is left of the os, and extend the end of him so that you pull the flesh to the split parts, and you uncover the flesh over the place where you want to cut it so that the cut does not touch the flesh.
Then stop the flow of blood or table from which the os falls smoothly, for when you make blood not prohibited that cut not harm the corrupted flesh.
And when the cutting is on the place of corruption little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the os and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces to the tightening of him from another side seen.
And if the os is corrupted and eminent, advance one split continuous up to the other, and the corruption is at the place of him or in a split of his, then you uncover all the flesh entirely; and bring fust from which, and tightly tighten that from the first split where there is corruption until it is completed the tightening of the other split.
And be the cutting according to the place of corruption a little, according as we have said.
But if the corruption is in the joint, cut that joint corrupted, and tightly tighten the os where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then not in him reason but foolishness.
And if the corruption is in the pect of the head or neck, it is difficult; However do you inquire about the corruption in what way it appears to you, and cut that, and make that according to each disposition which is possible to you, and at any time straightens to you, when it does not make opposite to you a vein or a nerve.
And you know what is cutting and the cuts to cut these bones are much according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of them, and the thickness of them, and subtlety and size and smallness of them, and hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every kind of operation a tool convenient to that operation.
And you know that this operation means to you of the kind of tool which you desire; since it is great study and long and careful thought of the ways of this art, and witnesses of ways of sicknesses, for then already have you seen by yourself what is convenient to him of the instruments to all malado.
And I give you simple forms in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will put on them simply as you will make use of them to your prohibition which you will experience on others. Shape of a knife or blade:
Other Shape of a Knife or Blade:
Other Large Shape of a Knife or Blade:
Ray Shape: The head of this ray according to the star-like shape of the claw: and the points of him are according to the shape of the points legibly.
And they do not fit except that there is a confusion of the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a great wide mouth.
Other Smaller Scissor Shape:
Other Wide Scissor Shape:
Other Shape of a Knife or Blade: Shape of a Saw:
Other Scissor Shape with Concave Blades:
Other Subtle Scissor Shape:
Other Scissor Shape with Curved Extremities:
Other Small Scissor Shape Resembling a Tentacle:
Other Minor Scalpel Shape:
Other Scissor Shape Resembling a Ray:
The ray shape which fits to the ratio of that which is pierced of the oses:
And the end of him is triangular and has an acute point.
It is made of Indian steel, and it seems that all the causes that we have said of razors, incisers, and saws apply to it.
Of incision ends and the tightening of os bones.
The ends can be cut for an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or you will cut that member into this which does not affect any cause, then do so that the corruption passes through that member entirely so that the malado disappears by that water of death or of evil which is a greater removal of that member.
And the sign of that person is that the member becomes black as long as it is affected, or it can be blackened appropriately and then the blackness enters into that member which makes it limp all over the body; so take care to avoid such a thing.
And apparently if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous things, so with the sting of a sea scorpion or an eagle or a rattlesnake and other things like that.
And if the corruption or stinging is at the end of it, then cut it and do not give space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
And apparently if you have touched the hand, then cut off that part of the fire, and do not give space for the corruption to enter into that member where it has touched the fire in the arm.
And if you have touched that part, then cut off the arm at the shoulder in the joint.
And if another corruption and the spine pass around it, then death for that patient is there; and other causes of cure are to be sought out in quantity of virtue.
And apparently if corruption appears on the foot as well, then cut off that part of the foot at the toe.
And if it is taken in the heel of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. May also be entered into the ankle, then cut off the sole at the joint of the ankle.
And if corruption has already come upon the ankle, then there is only one way to save it, and let the patient die.
And the way of cutting off a member or of sawing it is that you tighten the ligature in the part where you want to cut, and strengthen another ligature over the spot; and extend the minister a ligature to the ends, and extend another ligature on them; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures apart from one another so that all the flesh is uncovered; and then it should be cut or sawn.
And when it has been stopped with a piece of cloth from all parts so that the spot does not touch, and comes to the patient's injury adjusted and poultice cautery.
May also be a flow of blood when you work, then cauterize the spot properly, or apply some powders to tighten the blood; and return to your medicine until it is completed.
And then tie the aching member with a ligature that suits you, and heal that part so that it is healed.
And I recommend to you that he goes to a man in his own shoe, this kind of accident which I have recommended to you and which is called the blackness in his own shoe because it was gathered together by fire combustion.
And that corruption first occurred in his foot, where it extends all over the foot.
And then that man prepared for himself later than to remove the cure to the member with the speed of his hand which hurts and dries up him; and he cut off the foot at the joint, and fire healed.
A long time ago that corruption occurred in his foot which was infected.
And then he went to me, and so he performed the surgery on him again which I had performed on his hand, approaching the dissection of his body; and that surgery did not recur, and it began to go to the other hand from the head.
And he called on me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to perform the surgery again which would recur on that hand, and rather I performed the surgery of cutting off the hand of that man because the virtue of the patient was over death.
And then he went away from me, and he returned to his own country, and he sent for me that man; and I prepared him, and cut off all his hand, and it was healed.
And I have not added to this narrative, but to serve as an assistant for those who fall into this illness, and as a sign of what it means, and according to which it is turned back.
Of cures for diseases and the quality of poultices with medicines.
When an ulcer occurs on thick members and the space of the ulcer is prolonged before it forms a scar, then it is broken and pierced, and drained out from it the pus, and the place where it has been opened is sutured, as if it were a vein, and the thread with which it has been sewn is not cut in the flesh or in nerves or ligatures; it is called an ulcer, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged until corruption advances towards some member, then it is called a fistula, and not named zook.
And the cure for him is that you cut off that entire ulcer with a sharp knife, and more so when it is softened and made with cloth, and that it does not stick to the spot by its corruption.
However, if you hope that the ulcer will adhere and that that corruption has not come about by a subsequent infection, and in the ulcer has opened from the front, then treat that with poultices.
And consider the ulcer, and if it is large, and the odor of the flesh is terrible, then poultice it with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and vinegar and honey, and they are applied to a piece of cloth, and placed over the fire so that the medicine boils and spreads in all directions.
And then you take from it the water which is necessary and dissolves the honey in it; and poultice with that ulcer, and tighten the orifices of it, and leave the medicine on it for two hours.
And then you remove that with a waste; and water for so many days until it is cleansed the ulcer and is refreshed the breath.
And sometimes it is poulticed with water of ash, when this medicine is not presented to you; and you take the ash and put it on the water; and then you pour that and poultice with it in the ulcer so that you will know that the ulcer has stopped.
And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then poultice with honey and water and add to it dried rosewater, and poultice with that and honey mixed with vinegar, for the property of honey is that it cleanses and washes, and the vinegar binds the ulcer; and when it has a flow of rosewater, then poultice with that.
And when you have made water a few times and know that the ulcer has stopped, then poultice with water which softens the flesh of him.
And you take from it an enfleurat and dissolve that with oil of rose and vinegar, or poultice with some medicines which have the properties which I have described in the treatise of the infusions.
And if the orifice of the ulcer is straight in which it does not receive the thread of the poultice, then you widen it little by little, and put on it a few layers of cloth impregnated with Egyptian or basilic infusion until it is widened.
And apparently if the orifice is wide, then you add the threads to it and leave the quantity in which it fits between the poultices.
And if the orifice of him from which the arm comes up to the shoulders is raised above the part where it runs under, then dry that with a poultice placed on its back, because when the arm is pressed in the cavity of the ulcer, the flesh is torn there.
And if it is not possible for you to cut the sinew between the bone and the skin as quickly as you want, then know that you should prepare the member by preparing it so that the leg moves easily according to what you have dressed it and that there be no reason for the leg to stay in it.
May that which is over the sinew's orifice, which you move constantly so that it does not come in contact with any liquid that may cause the leg' s swelling. And so that you know if what is moving from the leg is a lot or a little, or if it is digested or not.
And consider the place of that sinew to you, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the apoplexy.
And if your medicine is prolonged in such a way, and you see that the matter that has stuck to the sinew' s orifice has already dried up, or it has become fixed there, then let it be washed off or change the cloth every third day, and when you wash it off, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
May that if from the sinew comes a subtle virus, then do not despair of its attachment to it, for the leg' s healing is acquired, since in some men with slow generation of flesh in their joints plagues, and in others where it is made the opposite way.
And if from the sinew comes a lot of days and it is undigested leg, then know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinew is prolonged and caused by the long-term use of medicine, then adjust in drying out of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their effectiveness, then dry them out with an ointment of dye in case of the excessive addition of tar.
And the best aftercare is that you take an ointment of dye and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on the leg, and use that ointment.
And already it seems similar to that action when there is no leg swelling, take an ointment of dye, and add honey when it is inside that it thickens, and use it; or that you take myrrh and aloes and grind them all together and pour it over the honey when it is on fire, and then spread that one over the sinew; and sprinkle that which has been ground onto a cloth and tie it up.
And some times you administer to him a long-lasting aromatic oil and grinds of celestial lilies (and it is the lilies from heaven) and flour of erys, and use that simple or adjust it, grind them and sift them and sprinkle over the honey that I have recommended; and handle it.
And if the sinew is prolonged and does not heal with this cure, then know that corruption is in the leg' s bone, and already there is an inquiry about the bones or other hard members or at the joints; then you should treat it with a cure by a tube, so that urine comes out.
Of cure for paronychia and rubbing of nails and cutting of fingers and sectioning off.
Paronychia is an apoplexy that comes from the nail of the toe or finger and is caused by an incision in it or by sectioning it off; when it is prolonged and its cure is not prompt, then know that it is a painful apoplexy or a corrupted apoplexy; or it is rotten, and it has broken the root of the nail, and then know that all of it is corrupted, and then its color becomes dark.
And so when you have that one with water that I have said in the division and do not trust your cure, then know that you should cut off all the excess that is coming out from under the nail, and then cauterize the wound appropriately, since cauterization is beneficial in healing.
May that the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and that additions to the nail have already spread flesh from within the joints, and it has begun to ache and swell, then know that you should pause a sharp thread from the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push that flesh out; and let that one rest over it, so that what remains of the medicine is burned by a corrosive liquid until it is all gone; and then heal that one with an ointment.
May that if corruption has already entered the bone, then know that you should cut out the bone and extract it, for there is no healing time in which the bone is corrupted.
And if often the corruption and corruption go into the finger, then cut that one in one of the joints according to what it deserves, and then heal that one within.
May that if the nail has been punched or cut, and then there is pain in it, then know that you should pour the poison at the beginning, and then dry the nail with a sharp edge on it from above; and take care that the cutting does not reach the flesh that is under the nail, for you would cause pain to the patient by causing the poison to come out, and then cause unnecessary swelling in the joint. And then heal that place with an ointment.
May that joint is fixed, which is born in the most of men, it is very flesh and bone, and very much in the bones, or very much in the nail.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is born in some of the joints. May that which is born in some of the fingers does not harm you, but that which is born in some of the joints causes great pain.
And of those who are born flesh, the cutting is slight, and it is because you cut that one from its root with a sharp edge.
May that which is born in the roots of the joints, healing is difficult; and so guard yourself from separation from it.
May that in the finger joint, cut off the flesh at the beginning of it with a round incision into the bone, and then secure it with one of those blades, and then heal that one within.
May that consolidation happens to the fingers between their joints or by birth of man who has it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning fire, or by analogy; and then dry out that consolidation so that the fingers do not return to their natural form.
And then leave between their cloth of it wetted in rose oil so that it does not solidify greatly, and separate them from each other, or leave between them a thin piece of lead so that it hardens according to what you know.
And if consolidation happens to some of the fingers on the palm, then dry that consolidation according to how it has been prepared and adapt it to the shape of the member.
Of incisions of times, there are varicose veins.
Vices so are varicas, and so are thick veins full of melancholic excesses that occur at the extremities of the body, and most of all in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore I advise you to administer a purge of black cholera in some cases with a strong vomit, and then draw blood from the patient's basilic vein.
But the cure for them has two methods: one is that it be cut and that black blood be drawn, and another is that the vein be lifted and all of it be extracted.
The incision on him is according to this manner: dip the thigh at the beginning with water from within so that the thick blood be resolved, which is ferment of the thigh, and then tighten the thigh of the patient at the start by a cloth, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three in a wide incision, and then raise black blood up to the patient's hand from within his thigh, and then down into it, so that the amount be extracted which you wish, and which is enough for him. And this tolerates the virtue of the poultice.
And then bind it, and command him that he abstain from black blood-generating foods.
And repeat the cure with bloodletting when veins are filled and it is felt by the poultice.
But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you who scrape the patient' thigh, if it is sore for him, and then dip it in water from within so that it thickens and veins are inflamed; or that he be exercised by a strong exercise, if bath is not to your hand, so that the limb be scarred.
And then cut the cord at the right of the vein by incision in the long or in the back of it you must cut it from behind, or at the bottom of it you must cut it off.
And then open the cord with nails and extract the vein from all of it until you feel it coming out, and this is the appearance of it that sometimes comes out black.
And so if you drain it and of the cord sometimes comes out white what is called a cord.
And then hang that away from him by rope so that it be raised and taken off the cord, and suspend it by an ounce or a lion's tooth.
And then cut another incision near that one by three inches, and then extract the cord from the start of it from within the vein until it appears.
And then raise that one and cut it in the back section you must cut it off, and then extract that one and raise it up until it is extracted by the second incision, and then extract that one from the section that is above that one.
And then make a hole where you extract that one from the section that is uppermost or farthest from all of the sections, so that it is all extracted; and then cut that one.
And if you do not obey me that you extract and raise it, then insert a double sharp needle and tie that one up, or insert the rope from behind him and turn your hand over all of it until it is tied up. And keep in mind that if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to extract that one, and it has come out on the poultice through that needle.
And when that one is completely extracted, then place it over the location of the swollen vein immersed in wine and oil rosy and not rosy, and cure that within which has been healed.
And if the wine has been contracted without there being a tortuosity through which it was enveloped in the extremities, and is not according to rectitude according to that I have said, then I advise you to make a cut on that one at all parts of tortuosity from him and places of envelopement for him, and then suspend that one with nails so that you raise that one completely.
And keep in mind that your section must not cut the vein and not wound that one, for it will be difficult for you to raise that one; and serve your prudence on that one.
Shape of the incision with which the wine is dried:
Is not to him Accuited in this way with the needles nor is of acute extremity so that it does not wound the vein; and is of great flexibility for, if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; however, keep in mind its superfluous coarseness.
Of extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in flat lands in this way when the sun is in the sky, as it is in the Arabs' land and in the arid lands of little heat and where there is no grass or water.
And very strong it is generated in other parts of the body except for the legs.
And its production is of putrefaction that comes from within the cord in this way when there are snakes, worms, and insects born between the cord and flesh.
And the sign of the coming of it is of this vein that occurs in the leg inflammation with fierce heat, and then the place is swollen; and then the vein begins to come out from the location of that swelling as if it were a root of a plant.
And then, as soon as he has come out of the body, cover that piece of lead with which the weight of one dragon is balanced, and place it on the chest; and let the lead hang from the back.
And in so many cases when there is some reason for it to be in the extremities, wrap it in lead and then weigh that one. And if it is prolonged, then you cut a section of him and wrap it up; and do not cut that one of root within which has been extracted, for if you cut that one, it will be contracted and enter the flesh, causing swelling and sore in the location and ulceration and bad healing.
So that it is treated with heat and is extracted little by little, so that it comes out from behind him, and does not stick to anything in the body for any reason.
And of this vein is extracted in so many men who are of their length of the palm and are given up, and I have already come to me that I extract one of twenty palms.
And if it is cut in the hour of its medicine, then insert a sharp instrument into the middle of him and pierce that one with a long sharp instrument through the body so that all that is in the matter is removed, and administer putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and then cure that one by treatment of ulcers.
And this vein has caused some rashes in some cases, and most of all when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out through the holes; and is extracted from each hole as if it were a root.
And then treat that one in this way when we have said, in the division and above what has been said.
Of the section above worms generated under the skin and is called bovine illness.
This disease is called specifically in some lands as bovine illness because it appears in the animals and is rare a type of worm that is born between the cord and flesh, and goes into all the body causing pain, breaking the cord and leaking it out, and it appears at the feeling that has to be its own reaction to the member's movement within which the cord is broken and leaks out.
And its generation is of putrefaction of certain humors in this way when worms, snakes, worms, and asci are generated in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of him, because when he goes in the body and is raised to the head, and comes to the heart, a strong fever comes upon him and enters and destroys the heart, and there are visible motes.
And so when you want to treat it and remove it, do not do anything without first preparing his body and mind for the operation, and then go in and cut off what is above it and what is below it firmly and tightly, and then dry it out completely and remove it.
And if it is sinking in the flesh and not being removed, then you stop cauterizing that place where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it, so that it corroded the flesh as I have said before.
But if that person comes to the heart near the stomach, then tighten it with a strong bandage and dry it out completely and remove it; and let the patient use medicine to evacuate the bad fluids by causing vomiting and keep away from food that causes putrefaction.
Of surgery for disease.
This disease is called nafir in our land, and it causes pain that spreads to the joints, and then it changes from one member to another.
And I have already seen that second thing that I will recommend to you. And I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I saw her arm swollen and there was a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and it continued to swell for an hour, and then it went away little by little, as if it were alive, flowing from place to place.
And then the pain of that place came into the muscle and stayed there for an hour.
And then it went to the other side, entering into the other arm.
And then I told him to turn over completely, as I had seen it; and he was very amazed at the change of position and at the speed with which it went from one member to another. And I have already seen that before in my bones according to that way, but I have never seen the movement of the members as it is now. But I did not see that in the bones when the woman was sick.
And I did not think that it would be like this because the woman was young, whose body is dry and has no veins covered up, and in this appearance, the movement of the members was evident.
It is necessary that it does not appear in this way, because it is a return cure for those who are weak and have soft veins.
And when you want to treat the patient and he feels that pain, do not appear to him as I have said before; then tighten it and dry it out completely in that place where the wind is stopped, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it in the bones, then cure it with the excretion of the body and with water that expels wind, and with pills made from dried herbs and those that resemble them.
Of extraction of arrows.
Arrows are different depending on the type of herb and the location of the body where they lodge, because their diversity is this: some of them have large tips, small ones, hollow ones, solid ones; and some have three angles, while others have tongues; and some are star-shaped.
And of the senses is when it enters into the arrow and pierces the bone, and it comes from the skull, because it causes a violent headache, vertigo, rigor in the joints, inflammation, and rigor of the tongue, convulsions, confusion of thought, and colicky vomiting; and then it separates a word strongly, and it is destroyed; and it is located in the area of the plague with white secretions resembling pus, and it has a similar taste to the moistness of the flesh.
And so if these sensations appear to you, then you should abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
But if the arrow lodges in the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel that it is stuck in a hard place, and does not cause any pain; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and the pain of the plague disappears blackly, and freezes the extremities, and makes a hissing sound, and faints; and if you knew that death descends completely.
And the lungs when the arrow has plague are frothing with a sputum of plague, and the vessels that are near the throat are dilated, and the color of the patient changes, and they breathe heavily and ask for air.
And if the arrow lodges in the veil that is on the foot, and the pain then comes to the small ribs, and it causes great pain and a sigh, and all the members of the muscles do not work well.
And if the arrow lodges in the stomach, then it causes great pain from a digestive disease.
And if the arrow lodges in the belly and gets stuck, then a wound from the plague or bladder or bowel is torn apart, and there is no hope for treatment by extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow lodges in the bladder, and it eliminates urine outside, and causes some disease to come out outside, and then it causes great pain on the patient's back; then you know that it is fatal.
But the other members are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not lodge in any vein or artery, and is not an evil arrow; and the various types of arrows that enter the body are: those that lodge in the bones, and those that go into the chest, and those that go into the neck, and those that go into the arms, and those that go into the legs, and those that go into the abdomen, and those that go into the bladder, and those similar to them.
And I will recommend to you that you understand about these arrows so that you know how to treat them properly.
That is because an arrow can lodge in the eye of a person through the nose; and I extracted it from him completely, leaving his ear intact, and it healed without causing any damage to his ear.
And I extracted another arrow from a Judge who had lodged it in his ear; and then I left the eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden completely, and it did not succeed in taking off even a small part of his ear; and it was an arrow of sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head on it.
And that is the Judge's sentence, and no harm came to his ear.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had lodged it in his neck; and it was an Arab arrow, and that is the one with the ears; and then I carefully extracted it, and it healed the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from the man which was lodged in his belly, and thought that I should die of it; but since three days have passed and there has been no change in his condition or his disposition, I cut into the arrow and tied it up, and he recovered, and nothing bad happened to him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow was lodged in his thigh, and the plague settled on him; and since it has been seven years, and there is no change in him, I cut off the arrow at its head, and he recovered, and nothing bad happened to him.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was lodged in her belly, and the plague settled inside her; and she has not changed in her condition or disposition, and the woman has not suffered any harm in any of her natural parts.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow was lodged on his face and the plague settled there; it broke the arrow, but he did not suffer any harm except for a slight pain, and the appearance of the wound was similar to these.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's princes which was lodged in his nose, and it had already fallen on the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And he was called to the treatment of him immediately after three days.
And then I relieved the plague of the arrow with a sharp attempt; and then I inquired about that gently, and did not feel it; but he felt a pain on the right ear, and then I realized that that pain was caused by the extreme end of the arrow.
And I applied an ointment to the place with an effective and digestive virtue, promising that the place would give itself to me so that I could see the place where the arrow was lodged, in order to stop it from spreading there.
And it did not happen in the place where the accident occurred that the arrow had lodged itself; and I continued to apply the ointment to him for several days, and there was no accident; but while the plague settled during that time, it broke out again in another part by space of five days, until one day he felt the arrow come out of his nose, and he brought it to me.
And then I stopped the plague with an acute corrosive medicine for several days, until it broke out again; and then I tasted it, and I relieved the extreme end of the arrow which was adhering to the stick.
And then I adjusted it in the treatment of the plague with that acute medicine until the extreme end of the arrow was clearly visible to me, and passed it through my hands for a space of time up to four months.
And then the plague became stronger, and I tried to reach it with my fingers, and I removed it in this way, but at the end of those efforts I did not succeed; so I decided to take a different approach, and I performed a surgery by cutting through the skin with scissors, according to what was possible to do; then I extracted it, and that plague was relieved.
And some doctors said that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it; and the plague settled, and healed completely; and there was no harm done to him in any of his natural parts.
And I will return to you the quality of extracting some arrows; that you stop them with a rule and consider them carefully, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by me in narrative form or in written form.
And the wise men know it little by little; and that which is presented here is when it is present; and they operate with a new method and use new instruments to bring down foreign causes of disease when they occur.
And I say that arrows are not shot from the members in which they are lodged, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place where it is located, or by repulsion of the opposite part.
And that which is shot from the body's place enters and passes through the flesh, and is shot out and removed.
And if you do not observe the time when it is captured, then know that you leave it for several days until you can find the meat which surrounds it, and the attraction of it will be reduced and its exit will be easy.
And apparently if it is lodged in the bones and you do not observe it carefully, then leave it for several days and continue to apply attraction and moisture to it every day, and it will be shot out.
And if you do not observe it carefully for several days, then know that you pierce the path of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a sharp tool; and then extract it.
But if the arrow has already entered into its place in the body and is causing pain, then you will ask about that with an attempt; and if you feel it, then shoot it with some instruments which are suitable for attracting it.
And if you cannot reach it by the constriction of the plague and its length, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then you will act on the plague until it becomes stronger so that you can extract the arrow.
And if it is under the ears, which are attached, then you will free the meat in which it is lodged from all sides as much as possible; and operate on it, because if you cannot reach the ear by twisting the bones, you can disassemble them.
And when you extract the arrow from any place where it is located, then use your hand with scissors at all times until it makes the arrow obeaise; and use subtle methods to extract it little by little so that the arrow does not break and is extracted from it difficult attraction.
And if you cannot reach that with your hand in a short time, then leave it for several days until the parts which are not attached to it can be removed; and then repeat it, because it will be less difficult. But if you cause opposite flows of blood, then administer to him the cure which I have described in this chapter.
And preserve your skill in cutting veins or nerves, or strings; and perform surgery on him with all the ease and caution possible; and I will return to you what has been said here and more.
And then you will turn the arrow away from itself, so that the plague follows its natural course; because it is more useful to follow the figure according to which the arrow was lodged in it, as it is easier. But if that is not possible for you, then administer water which is possible for you by the figures.
Mays the arrows that are shot out by the opposite side, or that you have already proceeded with some part to the parts of outside, or do not make it too big a hole in the tip of the arrow by feeling the part above the cord next to it and times there is an eminence; then wipe off that one; and cut it according to the amount in which the forceps hold; and throw it away, because it is only made easy.
If the arrow is stuck in the bone, then you should twist it according to the opposite direction in which the arrow goes into the bone, and increase the rotation; and then remove that one.
And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat the operation inside until it comes out.
And if the tip of the arrow is in that one, then you should press that one down.
If the tip has fallen and you want to give a shock, then insert that one, if it is hard, use a sharp object in order for it to enter into the concave part of the arrow and press that one down.
If the arrow is hollow, then you should press that one down with a sharp object so that it enters into the arrow, because the arrow is relieved by that one.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should cut out all of the meat in which it is lodged, as much as possible, and then clean that one with water; and if it is necessary to remove it.
If the arrow has hit any of these parts: the foot, the abdomen, the bladder, or the rib cage, and is so close that you touch it with your hand, then wipe off that one and be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, and remove that one; and if necessary, cut off the affected part until it is healed.
Shape of the forceps from which the arrows are shot:
If their ends are made like a hook, and they are made with scissors when they hold on to the arrow so that it does not escape.
And from those are made special threads, large, small and very thin according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its flexibility, and the width of the wound, and the contraction thereof.
in such a way that it is relieved by the inside of the arrow in the concave part and is pushed into it.
of bloodletting from veins.
The veins from which bloodletting is customary to take are: from which bloodletting is done on the head. (1) two pulsating veins that are close to the ears, called auricles; The veins to be bloodletting in the arms are: 5. Because one of these is a head vein, and it should be taken from the wild side; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a vein that is stopped in the middle of the forehead, and it is named because it is stopped by the finger; and it is called "citillar" by the common people, and they call that one "the vein of the belly"; and the veins that run from the arm, and they are stopped over the fire, and that one is the one that is bloodletting, and it appears clearly on top of the finger with two branches.
And on the foot and leg there are three veins: the first one of those is that which stops at the bend of the ankle bone of the wild side; and the second one is called soft, its location is stopped at the bend of the ankle bone of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, its location is stopped at the bend of the leg; and there are other veins that resemble those.
The beginning of these veins that are close to the ears is made from small, emigrant, safford and ulcerous blood vessels on the head from old bad blood.
And the quality of bleeding those veins is according to what you observe: it is that the head of the person be shaved, and that the scalp be rubbed well with a cloth; and then tighten the person's hair with a bandage tightly around their head until you can clearly see the two veins and their locations close to the ears at the top of the head; and want to cut those ones with a knife, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, then do not attempt it.
Then you take the knife, and it is that one that is inserted into the cavity, and it is that one that is stopped within the cavity until the bloodletting reaches the bone. And then you raise your hand towards the vein and the cavity, and you insert it with a sharp object into the space above the vein; and cut the vein with a sharp object. And the length of the cut is the quantity of two fingers or more of water; and make a hole in the vein as much as you want to.
Then tighten it well, and leave that one inside until it is healed.
And in the beginning of this book, the cutting of those veins and their cauterization have been described.
The bloodletting on the two arterial veins that are located in the temples is done to old, evil, and frequent headaches that flow into the holes.
And the quality of bloodletting on those veins is according to what you observe: tighten the hair of the person' head with a bandage tightly around their head until you can clearly see the two veins by feeling them with your finger, and then test them with your finger; and if you feel the pulse of those veins, then do not attempt it.
Then you raise the cavity above the vein with your finger, and insert it into those veins that are open by a sharp object from the side; and make the cut with a sharp object; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of what is necessary for you.
Then you cut off the hair of the person' head, and pause the bleeding for an hour; then put your hand on that one and tighten it with a strong grip, and leave that one inside until it is healed.
And in the beginning of this book, their memories are described; and those veins are cut, and their cauterization is described.
And so the bloodletting from the forehead vein is done to old bad headaches, and to emigrant, robust, and ulcerous, putrid blood vessels on the head.
And the quality of the bloodletting is according to what you observe: if the hair of the person' head be shaved, and that the scalp be rubbed well with a cloth; and then tighten the person' hair with a bandage tightly around their head until you can see the vein; and take the instrument that is called a scissor, from which this one is made:
Then pause the point that is eminent on the head of the scissor on that vein, and cut it with your hand or with another cause in the manner of it, and leave the blood flow according to the quantity you want; then remove the hair of the person' head, and tighten it well, and leave that one inside until it is healed.
And some of them are opened by the use of bloodletting, but I will not cover that bloodletting is of acute extremities just like others; it should be on one side rather than on both sides, and it should be applied across from one side to the other, for the bone is close together and very strong and would easily break if bloodletting were applied with a sharp blade in such a way.
May the healing take place in two veins that run along the sides of the cheeks by the sharp and soft edge of a scalpel, and to the hernias of the face.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient be bound with a cloth to his head and then bloodletting is done; you should stand above his head.
And bloodletting should be done across from one side to the other with a small amount; for in that spot there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is fine, then the edge of that side is easily broken.
And you should have the sand placed as much as necessary for it; and place them on those parts, and tighten them with a thong, and remove them afterwards.
May the bloodletting of the nose be done in order to produce acute fever and a violent swelling, and to the hernias of the face and the headache and rigor that occurs on the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of the bloodletting on his head is that he binds himself with a cloth and then he takes his left hand; and take hold of a small needle in your right hand, and place it on the top of his nose according to the straight line, for the vein does not appear here by feeling, and because the sand begins to flow after a while.
Consider that you finish your bloodletting little by little and let the sand run according to your need; and then tie it with a thong, for it is restored slightly.
May the bloodletting of two veins be done by a constriction of a string and the beginning of leprosy, and other bad diseases and painful and corrosive ulcers, just like hemorrhoids.
And the quality of the bloodletting on them is that the patient binds himself with a string to each of his legs; and let the craftsmen be above his head, and the patient stand on a bench.
And then bloodletting is done in the long vein with a wide needle little by little; and then take off a certain amount of sand according to the season or as much water as necessary, and then do the same for the other vein.
And then you should loosen the string and tighten the two veins a little with a thong so that the patient does not choke; and let him lie down on his back because the plague is cured.
And the bloodletting of the veins that run along the cheeks and cause small blisters in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are on the nose and around it.
And the quality of the bloodletting on them is that you stand in front of him, and bind his neck with a cloth, and open his lips wide and examine two veins, one on the right side of his lip and the other on the left; and the color of each of them is darker than the color of the other two; and then cut each of them with a sharp blade.
And if you are in doubt, leave him; and do not know which of them is, then go back to cutting the main one of them, and from the manifest blisters on them.
And make a mark on the two veins that run along his cheeks.
May the healing of two veins that run along the cheeks be done before the bloodletting of the head is done because it causes pain; for the healing of the uvula and the mouth is painful.
And the quality of bloodletting on them is that you stand in front of him towards the sun, and raise his tongue; and look at his tongue, one vein from one side to the other, and its color changes to black.
And then bloodletting is done on each of them; and be careful not to finish your bloodletting on those veins because they are arteries.
And the veins that are bloodletting in the arm are the ones on which it is customary to do bloodletting on all men, and the bloodletting of them is done in two ways; or they put a small blade in order to cut with subtlety changing; or cut with a razor blade, and if it does not work, then this is its form:
Cut the vein with a blade from time to time, and it is done by opening the concave veins that are full of blood, and to those that contain thick blood.
And this bloodletting method has a smaller blade and more subtle sharpness, and it is done by bloodletting on veins that contain subtle citric blood.
May the healing of the bloodletting on the basilic vein take place because it is one of three veins: for it removes the sand from the headache and back that are on the left side, and from there, it goes to the feet and belly.
And it is the duty of the bloodletting doctor when he does that bloodletting to keep him away from danger because he is dealing with an artery, and if he makes a mistake in the puncture of the bloodletting, he will cut that artery and cause a lot of sand; so be careful not to do that bloodletting with a sharp blade.
And if the basilic does not appear by a manifest sign, then you should leave that vein and go to another one, or look for some hair; or bloodlet on the end of his arm because that is where it is; and cut it with an razor blade, and if it does not work, then this is its form:
And if you want to do bloodletting on the foot, then consider that you stand in front of the tightness of his arm at the spot where you can feel the pulse, and then put your hand on it; and then open the arm and cut the vein with a razor blade, and if it does not work, then this is its form: cut it with an razor blade, and if it does not work, then this is its form:
And when you see it, with a strong hand, place your hand on the spot where you feel the pulse; then that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and so it stops.
And if the sand flows in bloodletting in the form of a child's breath, and the sand is fine; then you know that it is from the sand of the artery; and then put your hand on it and pause it for a long time; and then stop the pulse, for if the sand is cut off, then you should tighten his arm and leave it.
And keep the patient away from the moisture of the air, and let him be afraid of him and do not touch that place for a few days until it is healed.
And if the sand is not cut off, and it is necessary that you do not give medicine to water, then you should cut the artery, if it appears at your hands; for its end is contracted, and the sand is cut off; or take a piece of mustard, and open that vein, and place one hand on the spot where the vein runs, and tighten it with a thong, and put the other hand under the vein, and then tie it up, and if it does not work, then this is its form:
And if the bone has been cut off, it is good; and if not, then heal that place from which the blood flows due to the cutting off of the bone.
And the removal of the bone from him is difficult in certain situations because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of the limb being amputated.
But if blood comes from the black vein, then quickly remove it with a bloodletting scissor at the root of the head and at the root of the body; for this is composed of branches from the skull and branches from the head, as I have said before.
And if the person who is undergoing bloodletting is afraid of bloodletting on him, because it will hurt him; and then adjust the cut with the bloodletting scissor and tie up the nerve, it will cause him to be in a stupor, and his recovery will be difficult; and it will not heal completely. And these nerves are seen moving when they are felt; and if they are overlooked at some people, and are subtle and are not visible, then pause bloodletting from where you cut with the scissor, and avoid hurting the nerve with your tourniquet.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should open the vein in its length.
The quickness of bloodletting from the head vein is that it removes the blood from the head and prevents the headaches from the patient.
And in this specifically, if you want the bloodletting needles to be used for olive bloodletting or bloodletting with a blade; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not hurt the arteries or nerves.
But however, it is firm for some people to react with bloodletting when they are not bloodleted in the first punch; and if they do not know about this pus, then it will happen.
The first one is that from which bloodletting should not be done unless it is in the interest of health and out of fear of accidents; and that it should be done in the first spring, at the beginning of spring, and in the first autumn, and in winter close to the meal time, when there appear signs of fullness.
And do bloodletting on the third day or as soon as possible after three hours have passed from the morning.
But bloodletting that is administered, more so when it causes convenience and necessity to the person, or at night or during the day, at any time and in any place.
And that you do not bloodlet if you are over twelve years old, and women should not be bloodleted unless they are in the seventh month, and elderly people should not be bloodled if they have already passed sixty years old.
And if anyone wants to be bloodleted in some way, then make sure that the intestines are clean before the bloodletting with a bellows, if there is a retained hernia; so that the veins do not draw out the superfluity during bloodletting from the intestines, which are harmless, and they do not hurt the main members.
And do not bloodlet patients who are nauseous and have a hangover, or who are escaping from disease or drunkenness; and that bloodletting is avoided when the person has a sore throat, or a headache, or many pains, or an upset stomach, or excessive exercise, or long meals or vigils, or any other reason that destroys the strength of the body or the animal.
And consider with great care the types of foods and drinks that are eaten and drunk before bloodletting, and medicines as well; because it will affect the outcome of bloodletting on the person.
And you should not bloodlet if there is any reason to prohibit it, or exercise in any way that would cause the blood to be drawn out.
And pause bloodletting from him at the feet of the day; therefore, it is about three hours after morning.
And I instruct you that the feet of that person should be kept away from any animal accidents, such as anger, fear, and sorrow; and from all unnecessary work, and eating, and resembling their behavior.
And at the same time, you should not consider the causes of the person's common problems with aromatics and odors, and balms, and resembling them according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the bloodletting person on a mat that is soft or that the mat of that person should be bloodletting.
And remove the arms of the person, and rub them with the bloodletting needle twice or three times; and fasten the limb with a strap and wrap it in two layers.
And it is a moderate fast, because the fast without food, or with less food, does not affect the blood; or if it affects the blood as a mild effect, then prohibit eating meat.
And the fast should be followed by that person who is to be bloodleted; and rub your hands together between them, so that the veins swell up, and they are apparent to the touch.
And the bloodletting person's needle should be unsealed with a little old oil specifically; and pause their left hand on that vein from which you want to start bloodletting, so that the vein runs a little, and stops bleeding because of the veins being constricted; when the needle is placed on that vein, it should not be drawn out, and if it is drawn out, then stop bloodletting.
So, for this reason, the bloodletting person should be kept quiet and calm in all these causes.
And then pause bloodletting if the vein is hidden in a crease, otherwise, move a little away from that place, or above the navel, if the place has been hit.
And if the place is hit, or the patient is frightened, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not fasten the limb, because it will cause a lot of blood to come out quickly, and it does not enter into a bath.
And then repeat the bloodletting if you like it.
And if the person's reaction is small and their blood is drawn out slowly, and you worry that it will not draw out enough blood, then repeat the bloodletting in that place a second time, and adjust the cut a little, and do not fasten the limb; because the place is hit with a lot of people, so there should be a few drops.
But if that person has already been hit, then do not repeat the bloodletting there, because there is no excuse for it; and pause on that part of the oil crease, because it is comforting to the body' blood vessels. And it is better in this place than that of oil and the other oils.
And administer oil fenda in all bloodletting, and the veins should be avoided from bloodletting because of the person' blood; and when you pause from one of those places on that part, because the blood is drawn out quickly when it is large; and apply the drink of honey and sage when stopped from either of those places, because the blood is drawn out slowly.
And if in the place of the bloodletting is born a great pustule, for certain it happens that the blood flows freely there, and mainly to that which is not bleeding but the pustule, or in the sight of the small vein, and then you stop and put a sponge soaked with water and salt on the spot, slightly burned, and tighten it for an hour, for it dissolves.
And when the water comes out again from the vein, so as to fill it with blood, or another vein, and let it flow.
And if some black or greenness remains in the place for a few days, there is no water; and if you want to, put on that spot any substance of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or any substance of mint extract or calamus or similar.
And so that the bloodletting can be done from the base.
And so place your hand on that spot, and if it hurts, then you feel pain in that spot; and then take care to put something that stops the flow of blood from that artery, for a lot will flow from it.
And make an ointment with it so that the place is hardened, and then treat that with the other treatment until it is healed.
And when you have drawn all the blood from the person according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the prevailing color over the blood, according to what appears.
For if the blood is black, then leave it to congeal until it hardens; and if it is thick, then leave it to thin out until it is sharp; and if it is clear, then leave it to harden its clarity.
And when that person is fat and strong and needs bloodletting in a single vein, let the bloodletting from the vein be increased and the bloodletting be prolonged.
And when that person is feverish, do the opposite of what was done before; and when you draw blood from him in several veins, let the trauci be tight.
And the best thing that can be administered in bloodletting through a vein is to make a transverse section, not to pierce it.
This method of bloodletting is saved from the flow of blood and from the cutting of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and more saving than bloodletting according to latency and length.
And when the person is accustomed to fainting, then do bloodletting before giving him a little piece of bread soaked in milk or simple syrup burned; and draw the blood from him in three veins or four.
And if the person is weakened by sickness, then put on him before bloodletting a little infusion of myrrh or an infusion of honey flavored with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or an infusion with fragrant spices, or a flavorful infusion and a bit of pepper.
And if fainting occurs due to bloodletting, and it is a cause of the person's weakness, then put on him drinking water of meat and infusion of fragrant spices slightly diluted; and use something similar, and bind his feet with that.
And use the other causes we have mentioned in the division about fainting due to evacuation.
And who wants to remove the person's arms and dissolve his blood according to a motion evacuation, and his virtue is feverish, he should remove the blood little by little every day.
But if he wants to remove the person' arms and take away his blood according to a second extraction, and his body is strong, then do bloodletting from him every seven or nine hours after the first one.
But if he wants to remove the person' blood from his body in the opposite way of what was done before, then do so on the second or third day.
But that body in which there is much blood and it is hot and feverish, then draw the person' blood from one vein and make many incisions until fainting occurs, more than if the bloodletting had been done by a skilled and careful person. And place your hand on the person' pulse, so as not to die of fainting, because it happens that the heart stops beating when the blood is drawn out.
And it is not good when you want to remove the arms and take away the blood according to a second extraction, although the vein orifice has already been closed and it is difficult to draw the blood, for then you press down on it with force and bend it painfully, for that is too bad.
And wait until the bloodletting is over, or let it coagulate in the vein orifice, or put a light compression on it so that the blood comes out again; or place it on tarry ochre or rosewood, and compress lightly until the blood comes out again.
And if the vein is pustulated, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the pus has settled.
And if necessity forces you to remove the blood according to a second extraction, and it is not an excuse, then draw it from that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "bracing" is bloodletting in place of the veal or bazooka, when not bent or swelled, because it is made up of those.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient's hand enters into the water tail-first, so that it dries out and the vein appears clearly.
And then make a section on it with a sharp instrument, and bloodletting according to the transverse little method, not laterally or according to length.
And make an opening wide, and do bloodletting on that spot with your hand a little bit.
And if you prevent the flow of blood, then put your hand in the water tail-first and let the blood run into the water until you obtain what is necessary.
But if you are in summer, then you are excused from the hand-in-water method; and the season is paused for drawing the person' blood in water tail-first during wintertime.
And this vein's bloodletting is more saving than that of any other vein, because it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves.
And the bloodletting from the right arm's palm is done according to the method of the small finger.
And the quality of bloodletting is that you hold your hand firmly with a strong grip or slightly, because you have put it in the water tail-first, so that the vein swells and is clearly visible; and then do bloodletting on that spot transversely; and if you cut off that spot, you will not see the blood.
And keep your hand from being cut off during bloodletting, because those nerves are bare flesh.
And then put your hand in the water tail-first and let the blood run into that spot, because if you do not dip that spot in the water, the blood will coagulate at the vein's orifice, which is prevented from flowing.
And when you draw blood according to need, then place it on a sponge soaked with oil and salt, so that it is not hard; and if it seems hard, then do so slightly.
And the improvement of bloodletting from the left arm' palm is that it is done according to the method of the small finger; and the season is paused for drawing the person' blood in water tail-first during wintertime.
And make a similar incision in the patient as you did in the other one.
And the incision of the venous artery in the patient is made where there are openings to the outside at the end of the crotch, as well as the openings that occur from the motherâ€™s breasts, and the retention of menstruation, and the openings of the nostrils and ulcers of the crotch and old breasts, and their similarity to those openings.
And the quality of the patientâ€™s incision is that the foot should be immersed in cold water and a friction made on it until veins appear; then place the knife over the joint of the foot; and from that vein, make branches towards the surface of the foot.
And so, in the incision, place a wide patch and from it make branches to the knife; for it is better and more effective that way.
And if you make the incision on the footâ€™s surface, then take care of the nerves that are under it on the surface of the foot; and place your incision in such a way as if you wanted to cut it.
and be careful with the incision.
But if it is forbidden to let the blood flow; then you will immerse the foot in cold water and let the blood flow from it until it has been drained.
And if the bleed is too much in the first incision, then repeat the incision a few times, for the location is good; and do not fear from it, but take care of the nerves, as we have said above.
And make a similar incision on the other foot inwards.
And of the sciatic vein, its location is as we have said, to be cut where it begins at the crotch.
And the incision of the patient is made from the hip when there is blood coming out from the incision.
And the quality of the patientâ€™s incision is that the foot should be immersed in a bath, and it should be done quickly and firmly; cut the skin from the hip bone until the vein appears; do this with four fingers together in a long thin cloth, for it does not appear except by water.
And when it appears, then make the incision on it with one cut or two cuts across, and this is better done than not; or cut it by incision or cut it by sectioning it off, for its location is good.
It is in men with a slow pulse; and if you feel that it does not appear on the sensation of two fingers, then make an incision on a branch of it, and this one appears between the second and third vertebrae of the neck; and the ring finger also appears in the middle of the second vertebrae.
And take care of the nerves, and let the blood flow as much as you want.
Then return the intestine to its cavity and tighten it up; for lightly the incision heals.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of dealing with corns, or of warts, or of healing.
And the ventilation is made according to two methods: one is by incision and extraction of blood; and the other is by ventilation through incision.
And this ventilation that is by incision is according to two methods, for it is either with fire or without fire.
And the places where ventilation is administered by incision and extraction of blood are twelve parts of the body, from which one is behind the neck, and this is the last division of the head; and another part between two molars in front of the mouth; and two spatulas; and two horns; it is over the heel bone; and two blades; and two claws; and two nipples.
And ventilation does not extract blood but from the small veins in the flesh, and through this, virtue is not extracted by incision; nor is it done with fire or without fire, as ventilation that is made because of an opening of the body that is completely empty.
But if necessity leads to ventilation because of illness or constantly; we bring it forward at the beginning of the meal and at its end; and in the middle place, and whenever is necessary.
And therefore, if these things happen for such a cause, and especially if it is during the third or sixth hours of the day, then order ventilation to be made sooner than at the end of the day, within two or three hours.
And the cause of ventilation from the nape is that when it makes weight on the head and sinks into the throat; but take care that this does not mean a complete evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is in the place of the venous incision on the head.
And it is not good to use water that is too hot or cold; for this gives great pain.
And through the water does not pass that people should bathe in it, nor do their heads have fevers.
But to those who, while making ventilation on their heads, become conscious of the sensation of it; and take care that your hand is not over the ventilation, so as not to cause confusion about consciousness.
But ventilation of alcohol is in the place of incision on the jugular vein and the carotid artery; and through this it causes shortness of breath, constriction of the larynx, and stabbing with scissors, and coughing, and a tightness.
And take care that the alcohol ventilation is not stopped for even a moment; for if it stops, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
And the ventilation of alcohol causes headaches in the head and blindness, and migrans, and pre-focus, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and this is in the place of incision on the carotid artery.
And take care that your hand does not press too much on the ventilation, so as not to cut the artery and cause a rush of blood.
And if ventilation is stopped in the mouth, it causes alcohol to taste good in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and a similarity to those illnesses that occur in the mouth; and this is in the place of incision elsewhere than on the two lips.
But ventilation that is made on the two spatulas causes a headache through heat.
And ventilation through the two holes from within causes a good incision of three veins; and those are from the carotid artery, the jugular vein, and the cerebral vein; for those veins are smaller than the others inside, and those veins come together with them to make a path for the blood to flow.
And command the ventilator not to cut too much in incision; because it is denuded of flesh, and leaves aside its nerves and arteries.
And it is a wind that blows over the legs and gives to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers put there.
And when you command the ventilator to be a strong wind, and that it is of air, for the place demands strong section; and strong hand over subtle torn winds, and be scarified with the scarifier.
Lesser winds of the legs decrease very much by manifest caution, for they will attract the blood from all over the body, and confer it to old pains in the chest and the head, and to the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and confer it to bothorrhea and biliousness; and are in place of phlebotomy of two veins, and ablation, and of two tendons.
However they can debilitate the whole body and cause fainting spells in men.
And of the ablation winds, the restoration is proportionate to the restoration of the two-legged wind.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that you pause the wind at the beginning to see and drain through the opening in time, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but pause them slightly, and maintain them firmly, and let the humors come to the place by way of arrival inside. And do not cease to repeat it until you see the place already redden and swell and that the handiness of the hand appears.
Then scarify yourself, and repeat the little dung in little amounts, and then consider the disposition of the bodies.
For that man who has tender meat, when you scarify it once and not again, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the ventilator to increase the scarification a little, and make easy the dung.
And if in the hand is large, then when you scarify two times, for in the first scarification the way of subtleisation to the hand and its water is opened. And less in the second to the acquired scrutiny of the gross extraction of the hand.
And if the hand is very fatty, then the third scarification should be made so that it achieves the last one.
Finally, when we want to extract little by little or a little bit, it is enough to us with one scarification.
And if we want to extract from one hand, scarify with a heavy scarification; and if you tell me that the hand is large, then when you scarify with a heavy scarification.
Is the end of scarification in which the depth of the wound is only.
And if that hand whose knuckle is large, hard, rough, and the pores narrow, then when the places of the winds are softened slightly, opened broadly; if it is in summer, then also with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of purple-colored flowers, or oil of chamomile root; and if it is in winter, then oil of rose, or oil of mint, or oil of chamomile flower, or of hand.
And if the superfluity is large, sprinkle, then let the oil be amaranth, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and like them.
And if the ventilator is of large pores, then when it is forbidden to use oil, and when the places of the wind in their neighborhood are softened with a strong wind, or with cold water from salt, or with cold water from the chamomile root, and like those.
And if that hand whose hand is of a damp humidity, wash your winds with vinegar, or with water of myrrh and sumac, and like those.
And if the superfluities are large, wash your winds with vinegar of old age, or with water of sage, which is marjoram, or with anise water, or with chamomile water, and like those.
And when the wind is kept in front of a bath; keeping it administered for an hour or two, and then sleeping near the wind.
What is to be done so that the wind is controlled before the phlebotomy?
Then consider at the beginning: then if the ventilator or he who is to be phlebotomized is coleric and blows over his hand hot and inflammed, then when it takes cold things, such as milky granulas of vinegar, and artichokes of salt and lettuces, and marjoram, and like those.
Then pause their foods such as potatoes, and meat of black lamb, and prepared foods of spice, and like those.
And if the composition is fresh, then drink sweet syrup of alsace with spices, and sumac, and this should be eaten lightly between meal times; and that to him be commanded to use a little quantity of drink and eating, and pause his meals of bread and wine and water and petz of black lamb and pigeon.
Then when the day of wind and phlebotomy, drink more than eat.
And when it is given in drink to a few men of toryc medicine, or medicine of musk, which is musk, before the wind and phlebotomy, or near them, so that the main members are comforted and the hand is subtilized; and do not take those scalfatings.
And the winds of the feet that are made with a strong scarification are stopped on their bones, and over the kidney, and over the heel, because these members do not suffer a scarification on themselves.
And it is not wanted for those but the attraction of the hand of the member, thus when a wind is stopped on the breast in malady of flow from the hand of the member; and use that which dissolves fresh wind without hurt to the member, so when it stops over the belly and heel; because that rarifies the member and cuts it off and spreads pain because it resolves the wind.
And already is stopped on the chest when it happens in their operation or rain, because of virtue of strong attraction that raises the operation hand and removes the rain from its place.
And it does so when it is stopped on the feet and the kidney because of wind in those closed.
And these winds are given views with dung only; and some times are given by fire.
And some are given full of tepid water in malady of the hand.
And water is to fill the wind with a large quantity; it is water of tail or water in which herbs are cut for water.
Form of wind given by fire: be the width of the orifice two fingers wide, according to which we have formed it; and the quantity of the pour is most of a palm; and be in the edge of it, in the place that it is in the circuit, most of it, the stopcock is small according to the quantity that enters into it a needle.
Be made of eraser oil or lemon, of large marbles, lion, hawks and third ones so that it does not lead the member from its position on it.
And be under it a transverse pole of eraser or iron, where it is stopped candle by fire.
And already is this great wind of that which we have described; and the little little of that one following on malady and the state of that uses it.
And the wind that blows in the tired and weakened is different from that which blows in young and robust people.
And the quality of stopping this wind from burning the member is that it spreads the fire of wood decently in front of a few candles of wax, and places it on the middle of the transverse beam in the middle place of the wind, so that the fire is lit around the opening in order to not burn the corsets of the patient.
And place it on the member of the patient, and the windpipe that we have said, until when we have the wind, so that we do not hold it and it burns the windpipe, then let the wind be dissolved soon.
And light the fire according to its way, and repeat that if you are hungry from that.
Might there be a wind that is administered in the malady of pleasure, with water, in which there is no transverse beam or windpipe, and it is not administered but is filled with water, and placed on the member only.
This is the way of it: And this wind is more and more, so much the better, so that it can receive a great amount of water.
Chapter 67.
Sanguessuguas are not administered in the head members but are in the members in which it is impossible to place windpipes, due to their parvinity, so as not to cause pain and bleeding, or in a naked member of the flesh, when they are like the nose and ears.
And the quality of using those that if you have found blood-suckers, they are in the clean water of the mouth.
And let them lie down in the water at night, until they become hungry, and do not cause any pain in the abdomen of those; and let them be washed out with bloodletting and wind, and let the member of the patient be fanned, and let it be placed.
And when they are full and case.
And if you can suck the area from the windpipe, it is better to wait in healing.
Then, however, wash the area with vinegar and immediately pour out water; and let it be fanned and pressed.
And if you prolong the patient's time, you should put a cloth in water and place it on the area where the blood-suckers are lodged, and let that remain until the blood is drained.
And if the wound multiplies, then sprinkle over it three-parted vitriol, or fry and similar things to those of stinging causes, until the wound is dried up; or let them be placed on the area of the beans that are boiled, and let them lie down until the beans stick to the area, and the wound is dried up.
And in addition, if necessary, an iteration of blood-suckers, when it is possible to change those.
And if blood-suckers are forbidden by suspension, then let the area be fanned with a wound recently made or a needle is placed in the area until it causes pain; and let them be placed, for those who feel any pain soon.
And when you want to make them fall down, sprinkle over those a little dried three-parted aloe, or salt, or ash, and sometimes soon.
Here begins the treatment of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very important in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of a fracture and an accidental dislocation in the bones.
Or son you aware that this chapter speaks of the jesters of medicine and the vulgar doctors, and those who at no time have not looked at the livres of the Ancients, nor read a letter from them.
For this reason it is made that this way of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten that at any time completely; and I have not adapted to that which is harmful, but by long reading of the livres of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I drew out the science from them.
Then I will direct experiments and studies in the length of my life.
And I have already described all this in this chapter of my science, and on which is passed the greatest experiment; since it has been renewed for you and freed from occupation with elaborations; and it renews itself at the end of elaborations; and demonstrates at the end of a declaration; and forms in it the shapes of the instruments that are administered in it, in addition to a declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Chapter one.
First chapter: On the existence of fractures of bones, from which a necessary premise is taken before we begin to mention the members that are broken and diverse if each one's. Therefore, I will say in the prologue of this chapter the highest words; and the chapters to understand those who, at the beginning, are surely the creators and are aware of the truth of those; or they who are eager to learn this noble art from others instead of you.
And therefore I say that when it happens to a certain fracture or dislocation or twisting or positioning, then let you be aware at the beginning with bloodletting or cooling of the member, or any medicine, if it is not prohibited by any cause, as it destroys virtue, or that in which it happens to be feverish, or hot weather, or violent weather.
Then let it be content with a diet of fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabots; and prohibit gross meats and fill it with a diet that fills the veins of blood, until you are sure to prevent fever, and if you do not fear the escape of matter from the member.
Then return the patient to his usual regime first by what he usually does with him.
And therefore the broken bone begins to be restored; and let it be said that the patient is fed with nutritious foods of meat that are strong and thick in consistency, as well as corn meal cooked in water, and rice, and potatoes, and fresh milk, and these foods are digested easily, and with ease, and taste similar to those, and when fed on this diet, there is a clotting of the fracture slightly.
You know that bones break when they are in people who are in their youth and the old people; it is not possible for them to be continued and to be consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of the members of them.
But nature ajustes and amnesces on the broken bone from any cause that is similar to glut in which there is a thickness that adheres to it, and strengthens it within until its end, since it comes to strength and firmness; as with fire at the beginning, since no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary to stop the patient's food, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
You know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, as a fracture in the back bone is different from a fracture in the head bone; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the leg; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I have remembered all kinds of fractures, described in my separate chapter from the other.
Of various kinds of fractures within itself. And the various kinds of bone fractures within themselves; for an arched fracture happens in its stars; and some are broken according to the length of the bone: and those of the shank and toes and additions, either coming or not coming, so it is done when prepared to write, and a fracture is made with pain and disturbance on the head, and that fracture is a small crack.
And all kinds of pain are invented or torment properly when remembering it distinctively in its locations.
Of a sign of bone fracture. And by this is known a fracture of the bone: it is a wrinkling of it, and from that prominence and appearance of it at feeling, and so with it when it compresses your hand.
And therefore when it is not in the location of the wrinkling that appears or not it is not done with gentle touch when touching the bone with movement and the patient does not suffer great pain, then there is no fracture here.
And while it is possible that there is wrinkling or a small crack, then do not compress all of it with your hand and at the same time pause over it of the medicines of which you have remembered properly that moment in which it is caused; and then put it tightly by a subtle tightening.
And you know that the place where it is arched and does not split into two or another that happens in its shank, when it is straightened completely from its fracture, then begin your hour to correct it while happening to it that a blister comes up with care.
And if to it that blister comes up with care, then leave that for a few days until it stops coming; and then put it in either way that you can of levitation and inventing.
And you know that restoration of the bone and healing of it is lighter than that of the bone where such happens.
Then strengthen that second which will come with the reminder of it.
May it be that the shanks are broken in two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or the hand itself if it is a small member; or two strings or one string and the hand.
And be your position in which you pause the member loc where it fits according to its natural figure, while the fractures are extended from the member that is broken, then know that you must make points in them to heal, and according to any way that you can in their locations.
And watch your strength so that it does not happen to the patient through your operation or injury; and according to your ability, apply a member of one bone to another according to its thousands of forms.
Then when you touch your hand with it in that hour, and if there is some other cause, correct it and put it in by the quantity of your virtue.
And he exhales a violent extension and compression, as when foolish doctors cause blisters to form with their operation, or cause a contraction in the member where it has happened; so that it is seen that by the operation of its members the patient does not feel pain, and then you have done.
And the quality of the member's rest is that which I recommend; so that you know that broken members are different in their smallness and greatness and in the form of them.
And of those that are small so that the arm is like a feather and similar to those, then know that the wrapping is of fine cloth.
May it be that they are big so that the leg or the back is wrapped, then know that in them is a binding around and hard, because the binding around connects the large member and strengthens all parts with a binding; and not in it enter spots.
Then begin your operation of equality, pause carefully at it, over the location of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the member you want; and strengthen your hand a little by the binding.
Then see if it is already done with the most sober member of the fracture's location, and strengthen your hand that does not feel the binding in which you have strengthened the site of the fracture. Then lengthen your hand a little by wrapping up the site of the fracture, and soften the binding little by little, until it takes a large piece.
Then take another object and wrap it up over the injured site with a wrapping, and see if it is done with the most dry of the wrapping; then see the operation in the binding and softening of that one according to what we have said in the first wrapping.
Then pause between the wrappings of leather or cloth where it is wrapped up in the wrinkling of the fracture, if there is wrinkling; and otherwise, do not pause for any reason.
Then pause over another object, and also put it under those wrappings gently made, if there is no swelling or blister at the site, then pause over that water which causes the blister and that holds the swelling; and leave that for a few days; and then strengthen your hand over them.
Let the stelae of most canna be light-colored, and be shaped wisely; or of oak; or of palm branches; and let the width of each stela be according to this shape and this figure:
However, know that the stelae which are placed over that fracture are thicker and further away from one another than those others, and their length according to what is more in magnitude and smallness; then strengthen your hand on them with another object as you did at first with a binding; and then leave it gently according to what we have said about the binding; and it is as if that member were its own; and the greater it is from the fracture, the less the binding.
And know that the strings are lighter in thickness and subtlety, and they are less; and if the strings are thick, as I have seen through the operation of foolish doctors who put those string of rope on their fingers, it is a great mistake, when one feels the binding out of equality.
And very fine strings are not convenient, because you cannot achieve a binding with them that is desired; and it is not seen between stelae and stelae that there is a length of one word.
And if the patient is tied with those stelae where the binding is tight in its locations, then pause away from those of leather or wool woven within, so that it does not cause him a injury.
Some kinds of fractures are painful, and it happens in the knuckle, and I have remembered all its uniqueness in another chapter.
And you know that all broken member is not straightened with the stelae on the first day; and this is because the member, when it is big, does not know that it pauses over the stelae except after a few days or seven or more, according to your assurance of coming blister.
And this is the way of the embowels who the ancients restored, which are placed over fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Method of the embowels as a shower of restoration of fracture, convenient to complexions and mostly to women and children, for it is not from there that heat or frost comes: and that because you take powder of flour and is the meal of the flour that moves in the face of the miller.
And how this is done when it is ready, but you take powder of wheat and use it: and place this on the face not thick nor thin; and then use it.
Another way of applying the plaster to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: take asafoetida, myrrh, and sweet annis (milgraner), all in equal parts; also take mirra and aloe (ten parts each); use these together with some water or milk to make a paste; this is good for light cases of scalds and burns; and apply this plaster, since it is made up of good ingredients and restores broken bones slightly injured, and gives life to many men.
Another way of applying the plaster to fractures and twists: take myrrh and sweet annis (ten parts each), also mirra and aloe (five parts each); also take acacia (six parts) and bol armenic (fifteen parts).
All three are sifted in a mortar to make a paste, and then sieved; they are mixed with water or wheat flour and given.
Method of the embowelling of separated joints and bones from their places, and of pain that happens in them or cracks and fractures: take sheep wool and dip it into wine and oil and wrap it over the joint.
May be in this embowelling does not have virtue of restoration, of cooling fever and expelling pains properly.
Another method of the embowelling that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig and leaves of wild poppy; grind them all together and make a paste of it.
Method of the fresh embowelling that is administered to restore the fracture of bones and for the resolution of feverish colds: take powder of marjoram, of chamomile and of violet flowers, of barley flour, and all together in equal parts. All three are sifted and then mixed with water if the member is not scalded.
May be if it is scalded, you take powder of coriander and mix it with water and use it.
Another method of the embowelling that is more firm and resolving than the first one, when it happens that feverish colds occur: take powder of marjoram and of fennel seed, and of hyssop, and of marigold, and of chamomile, and all together in equal parts. All three are sifted and then mixed with water depending on the quality of the member and the repose of the color of the skin.
May be the Incense does not need to be burned in the air that is blown over the injured member for restoration, but it should be wrapped in wax and oil and not because of other causes; and remember that it is mixed between thinness and thickness.
May be the ointment is seen that has been applied to the injured member for restoration of it and causes in which it is exsanguination with small amount of quality as asafoetida, of calamine and similar to its causes that we have recommended.
Method of the embowelling that is used for injury and pain: take mint, of calamine, of a man's beard or of a woman's hair, and of marjoram; grind them all together in equal parts. Sift it and then mix it into paste form.
May be the quantity according to the quality of the wound that is being bound and then is removed, it is because you consider if there is no pain or injury or the bone is not broken from its place, then do not remove it a lot every day. And if there is pain or injury or swelling at the place, then you hide it or remove it in the hour, and then apply the ointment.
And take a cloth of linen and wet sponge with sea water, and dip that in hot water, and apply the lotion to the place until the swelling and pain cease; then allow rest for an hour; then place sheep wool dipped in wine and oil or rose oil over it, and let it remain there for a moment as sure from feverish colds, and that the swelling of the member is relieved, and the pain is soothed.
And then repeat that lotion slowly and gently and apply little ointment to the wound for your first time, and gently as that inside is healed.
And if the feverish colds and pain and swelling and all the accidents are relieved, then you repeat that lotion as needed; otherwise, you continue with the ointment and the strengh.
And if there is no cause of those injuries that we have mentioned for the member, then do not remove it, but only three or four days or nine or ten. and some covered all of it is left for twenty days according to what you consider in the release of the member, as we have said, until the fracture heals, and if it is not released, then allow blood clotting on it.
And then adjust the strengh more than your first time, and adjust the thickness of the member according to what is required for its memory.
May be if you notice the place of the fracture has become dry and thin more than what is needed to cover it, then know that nutriment is forbidden to arrive at that; therefore, dip that in hot water as much as you consider; and let it remain there for all three days; and loosen a little, and this is good for the operation; and bring nutrition to the member, and heal gently.
May be the water that is used to clean the member as much as it covers; and when it does not restore at the beginning, according to what covers it, then it restores according to its thickness, which is an error according to the operation of them, and great fear, and if it is a dry member, they will grow larger with the water.
And I have not seen this in any of them that water does not taste good, so it is more reasonable for it not to make you drunk.
Capitol: From fracture when it happens on the head.
The types of fractures are different, and the figures of them are also diverse, and the causes are distinct, because from fractures there is percussion of spasm, and the percussion stops all the bone inside the ciphac, which leaves the bone, as much as it does so in the wood, and this type of fracture is called ascial; or the spasm hits a part of the bone, and hits the flesh of it and does not pass the hit within the last one; and this type of fracture is called absolute levitation.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or extension; and its cause is percussion against wind or rain on the ground, and similar to them.
And this fracture or it is penetrating that already is approaching to the pannicol which is left the os; or it is in the face of the os, and the plague of these two fractures or is great or few.
And of fracture it is that it is melted in the os, in the subtility of the hair little, and for this it is named by this name a small capillary fracture.
And it is fracture that it is made or by impact or by percussion of stone and sounds like, that enters some layer of the os in the concavities, and it is made in the location of the concavity thus also when the role occurs to them of the sound when it occurs to their percussion and its entry is parted in the concavities.
And mostly it is made there in the bones of the os of the humeur, thus also when the heads of the effants.
And so to all these species of fractures it is said, so are points also it is said when the stars separated. And I come with a re-remorse of all this in its place.
And I discovered all these species of fractures by detection on those and by inquiry about their re-remorse and ostentation of the corrupt meat that is above them.
And the capillary specialty it is known by this one that it is discovered on the os, and it is dried up, and limits on it am-tent, since the fracture appears black.
More in the treatment of fractures it is considered at the beginning of the accidents of the patient, and if you see by the accidents that have meaning by clear manifestation on pain, also when it is vomiting of cholera, and ekstasis, and loss of reason, and absence of thoughts, and syncope, and acute fever, and sweating of the hands and feet and resembling to them of the accidents in the major dispositions, it is taken that it is not cured.
And if you times accidents do not correct you hope for salvation, then you begin the treatment of him.
Which cause it is since if it is come to you the plague in the beginning when it is plagued and that is in the days of winter, then consider that you study on the ostentation of the os before the day 13 according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you cover up the os before the day 7, holding that that is left the os is corrupted by the pannicol, and that occur the accidents that have recommended them.
And if the fracture has already reached to the pannicol covering the cervel, and it is am-parted little and worn out, then consider that you follow up the broken one according to what I have recommended to you.
And it is that you race the head of the patient who is plagued, and discover on the os according to custom and manipulation to you possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it is gentle over the patient.
And if it occurs to you the detection of the os, flows of blood or pus caut, then you pause it am-aquo that you cover, and it is that you put on the place of sheets infused in wine and oil rosy, and let rest the plague until that it is sedated the apostema, and sure of flows of the blood; and begin in the circumference of the os and in the ablation of him.
And there are two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you cut the os am-cut with an instrument of sharp edge, and this one is the form of him: And approach to administer another cut with it, a little less than that; and this one is the form of him:
And approach to administer more of the cut which is less than that second one.
And consider that there are diverse types of cutters, some of which are less sharp than others; and some of their shapes are less broad than others and are made of iron or steel.
And use their ease in percussion on the cutters so that it does not hit the head and that one.
And if the os is strong and hard, then consider that you perforate in the circumference of him before that you administer the cutters on the edges, which are named not-deep perforations.
And they are not named that way since these do not stop the term of the os from the test to water that is next to him, since this is a round edge or margin on him which is left the head in front similar to a small margin or circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the consistency of the os.
And it is convenient that you take from these types of edges in great number since each one convenes to the consistency of each os, until you present in all tests of the cervel the edge of which is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of the consistency of this test.
And this one is the form of three types of edges: The quality of piercing in the circumference of the broken os it is that you leave the edge on the os and turn him am-lines over the line that you know that the os has already been penetrated; and approach to place the edge at another place, and pause there the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around him.
And then you cut with the cutter between each break of the os and turn it gently so that it can be put on water's edge, also when we have said, until you separate the os, or by your hand, or for any other cause with any instruments which will fit to him, also when you have rinsed and forced-out the blood.
And consider that you watch carefully that the cutter does not touch any edge of the os.
And therefore when you have circled the os you perforate it and separate from the os if it continues to him, and then you extract it, considering that you race and include it in the asperity of him on water that it is in the os am another instrument which seems like a cutter, more however consider that it is less sharp and subtler than the other cutters.
And if it remains any small edge of the bones it is said, then consider that you take this with ease in water that it is necessary for you of the instruments; and approach to put out the plague with the towels and wash them which we have said.
And the other way of operation is light, far from pain, which is named by Gualia and the lauzec for great length; and this one is the discourse of him: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to discover the break of the os in the place in which it is the most violent and manifest fracture, until when you have discovered that break and have paused it am-cut from the edge of him long and gentle of the cutter whose this one is the form:
And it is that the round edge is sharp and does not cut any edge, and the sharp edge is of him before in length, also when you times: That the round edge is adjusted to the os with the face of him which is sharp on the os.
And then you hit on the cutter of a small break in little part until you cut all the os easily also when it is rolled over, and you are sure that the pannicol does not occur to it the accident which you have feared in any way, and if the medicine was the most ignorant of its people; certainly, and if it was sleeping.
And then consider that you hit on any cause annexed to the os of the pannicol in some places of os, you cut it from him with the edge of the cutter which is less sharp, and you deliver it easily since it is delivered from him the pain and the trouble.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate within the pannus, and what is excised or remains on the bone is its face, and it has roughness and subtle sharpness, then cover that roughness and eradicate those subtleties with sharp and subtle razors which you have prepared, in various quantities so that you can administer them in all places most convenient to their use, and the rightmost of these according to where you lose your way during your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
And when you administer in your hand where you are cutting the bone at the beginning with those razors whose edge is thickest, and then use the thinnest of them, and do not stop to cut according to continuity until you reach the place where you can administer the most thick and the thinnest of all.
Or in any of the other small fractures of the capillary and subtle fracture, then administer cure according to where you have lost your way towards its correction.
This is why it has not been applied to all those who have studied in that science. And it has not been applied to this which we have shown in great fractures.
And if the pannus is rettangled when you eradicate the bone, then take a drape according to the quantity of the wound, and immerse that one in rosin oil, and pause it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another drape double or triple and immerse it in vinegar and olive oil, and pause that one over the first drape lightly as much as you can over that one, which does not cause any pain to the patient; and then administer over that one with a thin edge, and do not strangle it except by the quantity of the wound so only.
And let that one be left with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of an apoplexy; and then remove it, and then administer medicines to those which are superfluous dryness, such as with linen rags and flour of erysipelas, and powder of enses and aristology, and of similar things for those.
This is because you make of these medicines a powder which is to be sprinkled over the wound, so that it is dry; and generally, administer in that one all medicine of its properties by which it is prevented from smelling and not chewing.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and do not be in its surdice of ointment or other; nor do you leave adding virulence to it; for when it is adjusted over the pannus of the skull, it corrupts that one and destroys it, and comes to the patient's foot properly.
And comes to the patient' foot properly and carefully, because when it is adjusted over the skull cap, and when the bone is removed from its cavity and the wound is larger than it should be in the cure of it, and it is darker on its surface; and then consider at that time if such accidents come to the patient, you will know that they are dangerous altogether.
And if that blackness does not happen except from the medicine which is placed on it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that such blackness happens, then take a container of honey and another of rosin oil. And on those rags put a drape, and then pause that one over the skull cap; and then cure that one with the medicines which you think convenient so that it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the Restoration of a Broken Nose
You will know that the nose is not broken from two pieces of cartilage alone which are separate, or one of those alcinas (nasal passages) is blocked, because there are two bones, because the piece of cartilage is broken and does not happen to it except by atravertimento and tortuosity and pain.
Or if one of the two pieces is broken, then put your little finger in its nose, and press that fracture inwardly with the tiny point, and outwardly with the large point, so that it returns to its natural form. And do it easily for you, and be careful that it does not fall during your operation on the patient' foot.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not pierce that one, then make it equal to the end of the bone at which it is small in thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make a semblance of that one.
Rest and take the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, then start to work on the patient to relieve the apoplexy.
And then put a drape over the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two rags, if the fracture is in two parts, and make it of such thickness that it fills the width of the nose.
And say of the old restorative remedies that the rags are wrapped in cloth, and they are changed every day, but I have not seen it; unless the rags are wrapped in albumen of egg with powder of molasses; and then leave the one inside so that the bone is fixed and made strong.
Some of them are blocked in the nose, instead of one rag, except for large rags wrapped in cloth; and that you have already broken your nose more violently and the patient does not stop breathing.
This is not necessary for you; and if you want, make it one rag, and if you want, make two rags.
And if another accident of apoplexy comes to the patient, apply to the nose with a cerote or a cotton swab in vinegar and olive oil, or with diaquelone.
And if apoplexy does not come, then immerse that one outside with flour of erysipelas and powder of cofit with albumen of egg; and then pause it on the foot of a lion, and do not apply to the nose for any reason.
And if the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then separate them with a pair of scissors and cure that one with water which hardens and consolidates it, and apply to it according to what is convenient.
And if there is a wound inside the nose, then cure that one with rags and administer an air tube into it so that it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the Restoration of the Mandible When Broken
When the mandible is broken and its fracture is not towards the interior, then consider if it is towards the outside only, and if it is curved towards its sides; then its knowledge is slight.
And then, if the fracture is on the right side, put your little finger on the left side of the patient' mouth; and in similitude if the fracture is on the left side, then put the finger on the right side; and press that one towards the outside with ease at its end which is broken, and make it equal to the other side of the bone at which it is curved.
And if the fracture of the mandible has already separated into two parts, then administer extension of two parts according to its continuity so that you can make it equal.
And if you experience concuss of teeth and disruption, then strengthen those on which you hope that they will break with a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and then pause the cerot over the broken mandible, and then pause the doubled drape over it, and then pause the large star over it properly, or a weight of one thread to its length; and then remove that one upwards according to what you have fixed in the lacing, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the servant to rest and be calm, and pause the meal for him in small sips.
And if you think that the figure has already changed in some way, then put yourself in a recumbent position and leave it for three days; and correct what has already changed from him with powder of moly, album of honey, or flour of cicero, because you will have remained the cerot of him, and place over the plaster woolen lion.
And afterwards, as soon as it is well fixed to him, and the disposition of the bone does not change, leave him, that he should be healed and strengthened in the fracture; because if the fracture is seen to be straining after three weeks.
And if another wound of putrefaction has appeared in the seat of him within that it should be healed, then administer to him that he has said that it is seen to be healed, and let the putrefaction remain.
And if the fracture is a deep one, then consider if it is a separation of the bone or a fracture, then you will have to support those with water that you carry in the movement of those of the weapons.
And if the hole of the wound is straining, then you will have to increase it with a flush-cut according to the quantity of your need.
And afterwards, as soon as you have left those fractures, and if there is no re-bleeding, then you will have to plug the hole of the wound if it is large; and if not, pause over that one of the plasters that you carry with water and plug it, so that it should be healed.
Chapter V.
On the Restoration of the Jaw when it is Broken.
The fracture of the jaw when it is in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of these three ways.
Either it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts, so that there do not occur any fractures; and it is easy to restore him; or if it occurs that such fractures have occurred in him, and it is difficult to restore him; or if the fracture is very deep.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is very deep, it is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the jaw in place and the other extends the nerve under that break, and the other serves to support the patient's body.
Then cut the fracture with a sharp knife within that it should be made the shape of him, and not in his little eminence or concave hole.
And if you are in a place where you do not have more extension, then stop the servant' hand from shaking, and let the size of him be according to the quantity of your need; and stretch and raise the jaw and support it with your hand within that it may cut the fracture according to how it is.
And if you cannot reach the end of the jaw to the outside, because it is coming towards the neck, then consider that the servant be supported on his chest, and place over the muscle a small cushion in size.
And the minister press the muscle of him to the sides within that the bone of the jaw is raised in its place in the neck, and then you will have to cut the fracture and support it with a sharp knife.
But if you feel any pain of the jaw or it is difficult to move, then consider that you cut those with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you will have to use an incisive instrument of him that you have placed aside the jaw of the weapon with which he has been struck; because this is the shape of him:
And it is similar to a hook of which this is the concave shape; and its size should be according to the water that you have needed for him, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
But the length of him should be according to that it is possible for the operation; that there are two ends like this, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have cut when you extract the fragment from the bone is wide, and you are sure that it is free from putrefaction, then you will have to join together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is little, or you are afraid of putrefaction, then you will have to use a cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound's opening.
And if putrefaction occurs, then consider that you dip him in wine and olive oil, and place over it.
And all this so that the star does not open the broken bone; and for this reason you see the servant every day, and when the joint is moist or the plaster has already been opened, then you will have to tighten it again.
Then consider that you place the servant' sleeping on his neck, and leave him from shaking his hand a little cushion; so that the aid of him is raised above the jaw, and the fracture of the jaw is raised towards the muscle; or if his arms are tied to his neck.
And you will not remove the joint unless there is a little pain in the place, or putrefaction occurs within twelve days.
Then consider that you renew the plaster if you see the face of him towards water, and adjust it to the tightness and restore that fracture; and leave it so that he should be healed and the fracture should be congealed.
And it is strengthened and supported according to the month in twenty-eight days, and a few times it happens that it is made in men of time.
Chapter VI.
On the Restoration of the Shoulder's Fracture.
The tart spatula is broken in the place of him where it lies, and not broken from him but only from the sides.
And when the place of him is broken  â€” and it is broken in the middle of him  â€” and is not understood unless touched, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare him for you and reduce that according to the natural figure in any way convenient for him; and if necessary, make a cut on one side.
Then consider that you place over the place with flour on it and olive oil, and place over it a double cloth; then consider that you place over it a thin shield according to the quantity of the spatula whole or a little less.
But if the shield leaves a concave shape in some part of the place of the spatula, then consider that you fill that concave shape with olive oil, and place that shield over it according to equality.
Then consider that you tighten him with a long thistle and hold the shield tightly, and so that it should not be moved from its place.
And observe each joint daily; and whenever it softens, add another bandage and tighten it and make the support equal if it moves from its place.
Then remove the patient's clothing over their body.
And the splint is to be removed in twenty days or on the twenty-fifth day.
And when this number is completed, then dissolve the bandage, and be careful to know that such is of the bones whose beginning is not painful nor their dissolution.
And if there is pain in the place of the bone and you take away the splint, then cut it on both sides, and tie it up tightly, and do as we have said about the fracture of the scapula with respect to apoplexy, if it happens here.
Chapter. VII.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Foot.
The foot, in certain cases, breaks at its midpoint and is very much hurt thereby; but the ends of it move about as if they were cicadas and crushed.
And of the accidents of the foot when its middle part breaks, it is that it inclines towards the inside and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, sweating, and vomiting; and it is manifested in the cavity of the broken bone, and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient' clothing be laid over their two feet, and a cushion placed between their thighs; then press the muscles against them, and adjust their ribs between two sides, and do so carefully in the operation upon them and in making the adjustment according to any way possible which enables you to return the bone's shape, provided that it returns to its place.
And place over it paste and straw and a thin tablecloth of silk or of calico and their likes in suspension, because you wrap that up in a cloth; and carefully do not tighten it upon the broken bone so as not to cause pain; and consider the bandage throughout the entire hour, and when it softens, tighten it.
And if necessity compels that a corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or apoplexy occur in the place, then you cut off and peel it away and remove the paste and correct it as by water in the way of cure; and carefully reduce the bandage, if it were necessary to return it to its place; and adjust the tightness, provided that it is healed.
Chapter. VIII.
Of the Restoration of Ribs When They are Fractured.
Be aware that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large places which meet at two points; and from the ends of them, starting from the front, it does not occur to those fractures unless by water because they are cartilage. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from sensation; therefore, inquire about it through examination.
And the restoration be such that it join the fracture through examination according to any possible way, provided that it is not swallowed according to what covers it; and carefully bandage the broken bone with a splint, if you wish for it.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the inside, then there occurs to the patient great pain and prickling, as if he had wept, and by water because the bone is covered with a membrane; and there occurs to him difficulty in walking, coughing, and vomiting from pain; and this is difficult to cure.
And the Antidotes are well prepared for that purpose.
And of them it is said: "Let the patient fast for three days, so that he abstains from food which engenders inflammation and ventilation, in order that his belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture driven out towards the outside."
But we will prevent water from entering in such a way that it does not cause pain to generate apoplexy, unless it happens; and if it has already happened, then help is already on the way.
And they say of them that it is to be stopped from having wind, and that it is to suck strongly; and it seems like reasoning, but it is feared that the wind will throw away the excess by means of weakness.
And they say of them: "Let that place be covered with wool which has already been submerged in oil, and let powder be placed between the ribs until it is filled up, so that it is bandaged up tightly when you wrap that up according to its roundness; and carefully cure the patient through the cure of pleurisy from fasting and medicine."
And if it causes violent pain and the bone is covered with a membrane which causes pain, they fear for the patient, then let them stop causing pain in that place, and let them discover the broken bone through opening it, and carefully take out the chip; for I will inscribe the bone with ease.
And let us adjust the two lips of a blister, if it is large, with fire, and cure that with paste until it is healed.
And if apoplexy occurs inside, then you cut off and put rose oil powder on the place, and bandage it up tightly; and carefully cure the patient through water which covers apoplexy from inside.
And let it be placed over the back upon which he sleeps, provided that he is healed.
Chapter. IX.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Spine and of the Neck.
Some cases, in fact, fracture the bones of the neck, and are similar to the vertebrae of the back. And if water occurs in any of them and you wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider that, if their muscles are already softened and stupified and dead and they cannot be extended or tightened by means of the tools which you have mentioned, or when you prick them with a needle and do not feel pain there, then you shall know that it is not to be healed, and in the middle of such dispositions it is deadly.
And if those bones are painful and feel a restriction through examination according to the needle pricks, then you shall know that the spine of the bone is saved, and that the patient should be cured through cure.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to water and wish to know whether it will be healed or not, then observe the feet of the patient.
And if you notice that they are already softened and there occurs to them wind and defecation according to their will, and some cases are raised up on their two feet and urinate, then you shall know that it is deadly, and do not continue in the cure of him.
But if no cause occurs from those, the cause is better and less painful.
And the cure of him is that you pierce into the blister which is behind the spine with rose oil or with molasses; and place over that blisters in some cases, the liquid within them until it is sedated.
And then place one of the pastes which soothes and exists upon it, and tighten it up tightly with a thread; and order the patient to rest and be tranquil and not sleep on that side on which he hurts until he is healed.
And if the spine of the bone is broken or there occurs some cause which has already separated it from its place, then let them cut off the bone with a chisel, and carefully adjust the two lips of a blister, if it is large, with fire; and cure that blisters with alchohol; for I will inscribe the bone.
If the heel of the foot is broken, and this is the end of the season, then place your right foot in your left hip, and join the broken bone with the other as much as possible according to circumstances; and then put plaster and a splint on it, if you wish; and then tighten it.
And if you feel aching in the foot, then place your hand on it, and hold it, and cure the plague with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On Restoring the Ankle.
Of Restoring the Ankle. The bones of the ankle are broken, and if they are broken, then their fracture is only a communication in the extremities of those and are inserted into the length and decline towards the parts inside; and it happens to the patient pain at the site and stings, and the chest is stunned when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then place it according to your clothing for circumstances until it is assembled to its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the length or has already declined towards the parts inside, then place the patient on their stomach until you are ready to restore that fracture. And then when you have set that in place, put plaster over it, and place the wooden splint on top of it, and tighten it with tightness so that you do not fear breakage or movement of the splint.
And place the cavity with something that fills it until the foot is joined by equality, and order the patient to sleep on their back or open their side.
But if there is a fever with chills, then stop the excitement of it and of the restoration until the fever is calm, and place the water that sits on it according to what comes before; and then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it like this with care.
And if there are aching bones or they are broken into pieces, then place them.
Chapter 11.
On Restoring the Fracture of the Calf.
The calf is what goes from the hip to the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in two ways, of which one is that you take a wooden stick half a hand-breadth long according to this shape:
And join two limbs together, and make it be suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a couch; and then cut off the broken arm from the wood in such a way that it touches the tip of the foot in its natural place where it is joined to the leg's curvature.
And suspend it over some heavy cause, or let the patient walk on his legs; and then give the medicine that breaks the fracture with their hands, until the fracture is healed according to how it goes.
The other way is that the patient is lifted up on his neck and held by one limb, and then order two ministers to hold water for the fracture with their hands; and then let one of them open the fracture with its hand according to how it goes; and let the other hold the pus from it; and then each of them extends to a part.
And if you want the excitement to be stronger, then hold it with two limbs on the fracture and on it with another limb, and let each of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then place half the limb on the hip and the other half over the fracture at the top of the leg.
And if the fracture is nearly at the hip, then place the limb over that place and over the hip itself.
Place it with ease and work, and then when it is set, hold it with tightness so that it is applied well by good application; then tighten it if there is no fever.
But if there is a fever, then let it be tightened for seven days, and place the woollen cloth soaked in wine vinegar on it until the fever passes, and then tighten it.
The way to tighten that limb is to place plaster over the fracture, and then place a drape around it; and then adjust the arms over the calf, and place your hand on top of the muscle.
And then hold the drape and tighten it over the calf, so that the arm is in place of the stelha, unless it prevents this by some heavy cause of the broken bone.
Then use this:
And this is that you place over the fracture the sthela that is further away and stronger than the others; and then place between each sthela the distance of a palm, and add three fingers to the length of the sthelas according to how they are broken.
And then hold them with tightness as was said at the beginning of this chapter.
And that your tightness on the site of the fracture be tighter. And when the fever is gone, then let the tightness be lessened.
And if you change the position of the sthelas and the tightness like this at the time when you restore the limb to its place, then do so.
And if you fear a fever, then let the tightness and the sthelas be loosened after seven days like this at the time when I have spoken.
And then consider the limb in all parts for three days so that no harm comes to it or swelling occurs in its place; or is forbidden the food coming to the limb by the disposition of superfluity of tightness; and then correct all of it according to what I have spoken.
But if you are certain that there will be no harm caused by it, then do not loosen the ligature until after three or more days.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his feet toward the south, and his hands toward the north.
And place the calf's woollen cocoon on the calf, and consider it throughout the night or during the day to see if the broken limb's figure does not change or if the limb is soft; then correct all of it with your virtue.
And then consider the patient's food according to the order that I have spoken before, in the beginning while it is loosened until it is tightened; and then when the food thickens.
The custom of the calf and its chest is that they are made strong after ten days; and then when they are relaxed, give it a bath and medicine to correct them.
And if the fracture is still painful, then you do not loosen that limb and the sthelas from it until after a month or more.
Chapter 12.
On Restoring the Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is made up of two bones that are called the shafts; the one is small, and it is that which supports the little finger, and the other is large, and it is that which supports the thumb at its end, from the part that is more on the side.
The large shaft is broken only, or the small one, and strong are its joints together.
And when the small shaft is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and its cure is faster.
And when the foot is broken on the side of the heel, the injury is bad, and its healing difficult.
And worse of those is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone that is broken is the little foot above, it is appropriate for the doctor, in order to restore him, that a small extension be made quickly without difficulty until he is healed and set back in place.
But if the big foot is broken that has been twisted, then it is appropriate that a violent extension be made.
And if both feet are twisted together, then it is appropriate that you make the extension more vigorously.
And since you have placed the hand in a resting position on a cushion and its extension over it extended, and the wrist of the hand is lower than all the others and the auditory bone is lower than the others, and the patient lies on a raised bed.
And a cushion before him in height or behind him, so that the patient does not suffer strain.
Then the minister extends the arm of the party below him with his hand or limb, and another minister extends above him as well.
And the doctor sets the bone within that second while he maintains the best position for doing so.
And if in the fracture of the bone there is a split, then you pierce all its length with your tool at its location.
And if in the split fracture there is a knot that does not correspond to your expectation in the restoration of him, then you break it over him and continue with the second according to the method we have described.
But if the fracture is open, I have already made a small cut there, and now I take care of that.
And if an apoplexy comes at the beginning of your restoration, then you lay a cloth on it with a thin layer of olive oil and white wax, and make it soft between the speculativeness and subtlety, and tighten the cloth over it tightly within that the apoplexy is given; and then remove the cloth and put on plaster made from powder of ash mixed with clay of wheat, and place shells; and that is the shell that is placed above that fracture on one side and more firmly.
And you should know that the names of the shells for the arm are in the majority of positions, or that is, when the fracture is in one foot or two feet together.
And then place your stricture on the location of the fracture with more vigour and violence, and when less severe extensions are made from the fracture to the sides or lower parts of it, you place the stricture a little less vigorously according to that which is followed by remembrance at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture should be soft, not hard or rough, and the true cloth that is tightened should be between subtlety and thickness, as we have described it.
And take into account the limb and the member of the body. And if there is a cause for which correction is necessary, when you put the member into the water, that the pain of it stops.
Then let the limb rest without support, and return to the stricture.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is already restored to its appearance, then you correct it completely with your tool.
And consider if by the stricture nourishment cannot reach the limb for its excess, because then it is softened a little and left for several days until it reaches that nourishment, and tighten it again.
But if the patient does not have a cause of those that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the stricture within xx days or about that period.
And hang the hand of the patient by its own movement, and let it sleep on its two sides.
And you should know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXII days, and the strong one is restored in XXV days, and all of it depends on the dispositions of the complexities and the dispositions of virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of the Restoration of the Wrist of the Hand and of the Sayings.
And you should know that to the wrist of the hand and the fingers are attached, and if the fracture does not occur at the front or back, then it is seen as a problem.
And when the fracture of the hand or the back occurs, then it is appropriate for the patient to be seated facing forward, and place the hand in an extended position on a cushion.
And the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor sets them together within that they are well joined.
Then it is appropriate to put plaster and chalk, if an apoplexy does not come; and place the shell above according to the quantity of space, and you have wrapped that in a cloth.
But if the twist is inside the hand, it is a twist of the palm, and make an extension with a long cloth, and command the patient to tighten that with his twisted palm; then it should be made tight with a long cloth.
And the shell of wood is lifted up with a cloth, in order that the wood be applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what is necessary.
But if the fracture is outside the hand, then place above it a shell of wood and another one on the sides of the hand in the palm, so that the hand may be opened and closed; and then tighten the stricture, when the hand is moved to the side by the fingers with the member.
And if there is a fracture in one of the fingers of the hand, then it is appropriate to make that small twist according to what is necessary, and tighten it at the palm; and if desired, place above it a small shell turned to the side so that the fracture does not touch it.
But if the fracture is in one of the fingers of the hand, then it is appropriate to make that small twist according to what is necessary, and tighten it at the palm; and if desired, place above it a small shell turned so that that finger does not touch it.
And consider in your restoration, and place above, the disposition of caution and opposition - according to the true operation - before that which is necessary according to what has been told.
Chapter XIV.
And for the restoration of the fracture of the hip bone.
The hip bones are twisted and it is seen whether they are broken or not according to their movement when facing forward and above when standing.
The restoration of him is made so that the limb is tightened above the fracture and on one side of it, and the patient is prostrate on his stomach and on his face.
And the minister extends all the limb to its side according to the quantity, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is at the edge of the hip bone, then extend the limb to its side in the form of the letter Z, so that the extension comes out at its end, and another limb is placed on one side of the fracture.
And if the twist is at the edge of the hip bone, then make the limb extend to its side.
And if the doctor joins the bones together so that they do not separate again but adhere to each other by a good joint, then cover with plaster and tighten it down, otherwise there will be a gangrene of the member. But if it happens that there is a gangrene in the limb, then let him lie so for several days until the gangrene has passed and then resume your treatment.
The bandage should also be applied in such a way that it is wrapped around the fracture tightly, folded over itself twice or three times and removed if it comes into contact with the bone or root of the thigh; then wrap the trunk.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and trunk at the hip joint, where it divides into two parts; take the ends of the thread from the higher part of the two branches, then turn them over the trunk and thigh so that they do not come into contact with the bandage.
Then place a support under the hip in the area of the fracture and put a stake across the bone of the trunk.
Then fill the spaces between the trunk and thigh with soft cloth so that the tightening is complete.
Then begin a strong tightening of the ligature at the fracture site with three or four folds, and the more you move away from the location of the fracture, the looser and softer and the wetter should be your tightening; this is to prevent injury to the member.
And stretch the ends of the thread from the hip joint to where it divides into two branches; tighten them both equally so that the ligature does not come off its position.
Then leave the tightening in place, lest it cause gangrene or gangrening or swelling or similar to those; and if any of these things happen, then cut off from it what is affected and correct it all together, according to the number of folds that you have made.
But if the bone is thick, then join it according to what is possible for you; and if not, cut off from it and heal with that which remains, and cure with it those who are affected within;
Some of these fractures of the thigh are stronger than others and should be adjusted with greater care; as we have said before in the arm.
But for the restoration of it in such a way that there is no limping on the part of the patient; and if it is restored alone, then apply to it another leg, because it is necessary that he should not limp on that side.
You know that the thigh is strong after a hundred days or more or less; and everything depends on the various conditions and other factors.
Chapter XV.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Ankle of the Foot.
You know that this fracture of the ankle is much worse when it happens behind; and there are several things to be considered: first, the condition of the bones; second, the position in which they lie; third, the age of the patient; fourth, whether the person is healthy or not; fifth, how long the injury has been.
But if this fracture has happened, then it is only a crack or a break in the parts; and that depends on whether it is in the middle or at the ends, for the latter is more painful and more difficult to heal.
The restoration should be made by joining it as best as possible in the middle of where it is broken, because it is easier to do so with ease and less effort;
Then apply plaster over the stake and tighten it down, if you need to; and strengthen the tightening at the foot.
Consider all the recommendations that we have given for other fractures; and if there is a gangrene it must be avoided, as much as possible, because it should not happen to it until it is healed over;
Chapter XVI.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Trunk.
You know that in the trunk there are two bones which are called by their names: one is large and is called the "trunk"; and the other is small and is called the "sideral".
It happens to all kinds of fractures in the arm, which are two bones; and the restoration is made in the same way as that of the arm, and the operation is one and the same.
And if both bones break together, then the trunk becomes shattered.
And if one of the small bones breaks, then the trunk becomes broken in front.
And if one of the large bones breaks, it goes behind; and it is one of those cases that are not familiar to you.
Then apply the same measures of stretching and tightening to the branches according to the engagement.
But if the fracture of the trunk is not very severe and there are no broken ends, then apply to it a moderate stretching; and rejoice in your skill.
And in the trunk there is a reason for an operation on the arm; and it is when you join the branches together and complete all the operation; then take from the ends of the handle what are made of fine wood; take care to cut off only that part which is necessary, and do not damage those parts that are useful; and if they are small, take care not to damage them; and if there is a long piece, join it according to the length of the trunk, and from the hip to the top;
Then wrap each sheet twice according to the length of it; and place one over the other from one side of the trunk to the other, and put between them a space at the top of the foot.
Then tie the two branches at three places: twice at the ends and once in the middle; because with this tightening the trunk does not lean to the right or left side, and it is in good position.
And one handle of wood has been made according to the length of the trunk; and it should be placed in it so that it moves with the trunk.
Then, after having finished this work, then you will know how to heal it when broken; and there is no healing for it.
Then consider the trunk every day and study it carefully; and you should guard against gangrene or swelling or similar causes; and if any of these things happen, then cut off from it what is affected and heal it, so that it may be healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the Fracture of the Ankle and the Foot Bones.
The ankle does not fracture altogether; but in the bones of the foot there are some fractures; and in the feet of the horse there is little fracture or none; and in the same conditions of age and health.
But if the bones of the foot are fractured and they are raised above themselves; then the patient should be lifted up with care, facing downward, and prepare it for treatment.
Then place one foot on top of the other bones; and press down on them and join them together, so that they do not separate again but adhere to each other by a good joint; and if necessary, appeal to Podagors for help in this matter.
Then apply plaster over it, and put something under the foot; place a small table on its two edges so that they rest on it.
Then tighten that foot with a descent stretching, because you have wrapped it in cloth and from other causes from which he suffers;
Then after three or four days pass the ligature, because you will see if the bones are engaged or not; and the operation in them is done with care.
If some say that their toes are numb, then restore them, and also cover those with ice and give them wine to drink in small amounts, and keep them warm. Then pause the pinching for a second according to its length, and place a little bit aside; then remove the foot from this table, which is recommended to you, and tighten it with a tight bandage.
If there is a pinching in the bones of two or three or more, then you pause on each one astela of its quantity wrapped in linen, and tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand over one of the heads of the table with your stomach facing the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
It is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes that have been said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and pause for any accident that you may have.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Fracture of the Knee-cap of the Femur and of the Hip-bone, and on the Arm of a Man.
When the knee-cap of the femur is pinched, then make that cut in a knife-like way, and incline it a little at the top of the two, and hold it behind.
Then the midwife presses on the knee with her hand, and makes it move forward with hope; then the woman is shaken, and raises her two legs little by little, for as soon as this leg is outside, it will be in front of the knee with hope and the pinched bone returns.
Then pause with powder on her legs, and when she wants to urinate, she removes the bandage easily and urinates, and reduces it and returns that second to the way it was at the beginning, and returns to her first powder.
And so it is done for seven days or more, because that one is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of oil and tighten it on the top of the leg with a cannula of leather; and introduce all the bladder into the knee of the leg, and blow into the cannula with strength within that the bladder is inflated inside the knee, for the fracture returns.
Then it is filled with bandage and left for a few days according to what we have said, so that it heals.
And when the arm of a man or a woman is pinched, then administer to it the injection and re-injection of the water that we have said about the hip-bone.
And that water which is on the right does not hide these close fractures and those that are not much, mostly at the one for whom this study and use is made known; because that fracture means to you in the main ways of rightness in the restoration and strictness of it, and therefore understand well.
If the arm of a man is pinched when it falls, take a bladder of water, and put the arm into that; then pause it over the wrapping of linen, and wrap it up, and leave it wrapped up for three days or more, and be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the Restoration of Fractures of Bones when they are swollen.
It is convenient for the person to whom the fracture has occurred with swelling, and most especially if the bone is large, such as the hip-bone or the shoulder-blade, that you keep it warm and give it water often; and if the conditions of bloodletting allow you to do so, as we have said above.
And if the swelling goes away without causing any harm, then you will have kept it warm in your bed and powdered it with dried mint, unless there is another cause that presents itself.
Then begin to restore the fracture on this day, and do not prolong it, except in case of a fever.
If the fever comes on gently, then you will leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, as long as the fever does not subside; and do not bring it closer to the third day and the three in all, because you would make bad accidents happen.
If the broken bone is prominent on the outside of the joint, then you will have it reduced and enclosed with your own skin as easily and as little extension as possible.
If the extension is not prepared by you and is a complication of that joint, then reduce it with your own skin as easily and in little amount as possible; and that instrument which is made of iron, the length of it is seven or eight days, and its width is according to the quantity of swelling; and it is necessary for the doctor who takes three or four, according to the quantity that you need for the cure in all kinds of fractures.
Then make it round, and make it small in size so that it does not bend the skin too much on that part in the hour of the operation.
And it is sharp at the end, so that it has a margin on its ends; and this water of him is a great thing that tends to him, and most of it is inside the joints.
This is how it is done:
It is called in Greek "labra volentiaratelare", which means little knife.
So that the end of it is raised on a sharp edge above the prominent end of the bone.
Then put that in a cloth, so that it returns to the bone, and enclose it with a certain equation.
And therefore try to enclose the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the bone that is broken is small, and do not take the instrument for a good operation, then you cut off the end of that bone where the instrument has power over it.
If you cannot reduce the bone completely with water that we have said, then cut it with one of the scalpel knives that we have mentioned; or cut it with one of the razors in some way that is possible for you.
Then remove what remains on the bone of small scratches and little cuts.
And when the bone has been reduced, and the pain of the patient is very severe and burning, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and at that moment give water because you have deprived the patient of great good.
Then, when your restoration of the bone is complete, then cover it with black vinegar, and especially if it is in summer, and do not pause about the swelling or corruption, so that it does not cause bad effects and decay.
Then administer needles in the hour of the perfect completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the swelling uncovered in this way that you cut with scissors the edge with a needle, and use wrappings according to the quantity of swelling.
And you will keep it with all caution so that you do not increase the swelling with the fracture, for foolish physicians make bad accidents happen, and cause death or great corruption, or putrefaction; and this is healed. If the patient's swelling is mild, it will subside somewhat, unlike in other fractures.
If the swelling is great or is a bad swelling and you fear some other bad accidents that we have said, and feel pain in that place, then do not pause on that bone, but wrap it up tightly with strong cloth instead of needles, and tighten it with a bandage.
Then when a day or two have passed since the swelling has begun, which may be an hour, then you will stop the water that you had put on it with warm cloth, and administer calches, wet them with those with which we usually treat swellings, and make them boil; and do not allow anyone to drink water until they are well boiled.
And you have to make the member move so that the rot will run from it to the joints more easily.
If the swelling has lasted for several days and does not subside or disappear from the arm, then you must know that this is a sign of a serious illness and that it will spread to other areas. And of those that separate and are extruded, those that do not separate and put the member in such a way that they cause pain, then you must cut them off according to your ability.
And if the swelling becomes hot or cold, then it is a sign of fever or some other kind of putrefaction, so you must know that you should pause and wait for the swelling to stop causing pain before attempting treatment, which is described in the previous chapter.
And on that which you should rest and present your leg: when the swelling has decreased a little, move it with the help of the thigh and the supporting leg and similar to those of the large members, and do not think that there is any attraction from within or that the extraction will cause harm, because a strong pain will come if you do not wait for about twenty days or three months. And then heal the swelling if it is visible and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter 20
Of the treatment of a broken bone that occurs in the shadow of a fracture.
This type of swelling occurs in the shadow of healing from a fracture, and most often affects the joints, and it distorts the shape of the member; and it strongly prohibits the natural movement of the limb.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have been described above, and examine, and search for, and match them with the symptoms; also, do not neglect those that are slightly swollen or fully swollen, and apply those medicines to it frequently: vi-styptic, or milk of lead, or vi-agar, and place it on the swelling in a cloth, and constrict those around it with a good compression.
And allow the constriction to remain in place for several days; and then remove it and repeat this process as many times as necessary until the swelling is reduced; or apply a layer of lead over it, because lead has the property of reducing anything that is swollen in the members.
Or if the swelling has already turned into a chronic condition and stricture forces it to open, then cut it open with care, and remove the excess and the prominent part, or cut that off with an edge that can be used again, and heal the opening.
Chapter 21
Of restoring a fracture when it has healed and bring the member back to its natural state, without any deformity or pain.
When the bone fracture has healed, and bring the member back to its natural state without any deformity or pain, then know that this may be due to a variety of factors: one is the diversity of solutions for the limb and the ligation of it, which does not occur according to its nature; or because of an excess of stricture in the limbs from which the nutrient is prohibited from reaching the member; or because of a multitude of unnecessary embrocation; or because of excessive movement that is not appropriate at that time; or because of lack of nutrition in the body and for the treatment of it.
And heal that member by giving it food and making the heart of it strong when the pain multiplies in it; and administer baths, and pierce it with a needle and treat it kindly.
And then pause the application of a paste on it, so that the paste provides nutrition for the member, or continue the application of liquid food on it, which runs and returns to its natural form.
Chapter 22
Of the treatment of broken bones that are restored with twisting and prohibiting the operation of their joints if it is needed.
When the member is already restored with twisting and healing from a broken bone and swelling, it has taken on the shape of the bone, but nevertheless, the member does not prohibit its natural operation; so you should not accept that the person who owns this member believes that it is a new break.
However, there have been many false healing methods and restorers that have failed in this world, and such an operation is very abhorrent and carries the risk of death from the sigil of which it is deadly.
If the claudication and swelling are recent, then know that they should be treated with wet herbs that are soft, as well as with leaves of mint, and roots of sage, and honey; and it should be applied with a paste made from milk (dill) properly prepared, or that it is pressed out of the root of sage and applied with olive oil of cypress, and placed on a plaster of the same; or that it is made of soft fig oils and triturated with the seeds of collyrim, and similar to those of certain medicines called "universal consolidation."
And some are dissolved with a constant light friction that is more moist, and administered the movement of the limb at all times.
If the twisting has already begun from behind and is caused to be strong and turned into a chronic condition, and it is necessary to heal it with fire, then know that this is due to an excess of swelling in that member, and the continuous part of the bone is dissolved; and it is cut off with a sharp edge, and administered easily to that which requires treatment and study.
Chapter 23
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is a loss of the natural shape of a member at its joint, so that it is prohibited from moving, and the figure of the limb appears deformed, causing great pain and damage.
Then if you encounter a dislocation, immediately cut it off, and do not delay reducing it, because if it is delayed, the joint will split open and it will be very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And so it should not be stretched or bent at that time when reducing dislocation, because a strong pain and cramp will come.
And then when it happens to you, know that you should prepare yourself for the flaybotomy of the limb, and pause it so that the spasm stops; and then the member is treated with water from a tail and oil, and reduced easily.
And the whole body should be healed with water of which the memory comes to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation, following those of fracture: from the upper limb to the lower one.
Chapter 24
Of treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
If the two jaws are not tartered; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are remounted by a little movement, or they are softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated and softened at the joint before healing them, so that their saliva runs from their mouth and they cannot keep it closed, and the tongue is wrapped in its word.
Then if the dislocation is slight, in most cases return to their usual state by itself if there is a slight cause.
If the dislocation is entire and complete, then know that it should be reduced with care, and not delayed at all.
Here is the translation of the text into English:
If the reduction is difficult and primarily if both mandibles are dislocated, then administer water of chamomile and oil, within which a slight reduction of both can be made and not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And so, with return and Engualadas, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on those cloths of drap at cerot, and be made of wax and oil rosy; and so tie with ease with liamens mols.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and the head of him between two armpits, that he may not swerve in any part right or left; and do not push for any reason; have the patient's food be forbidden lion, within which when the pains are relieved and the mandibles are no longer swollen, then drink what you want.
And this water should be administered with ease, and do not work on the mouth of the patient in eating or drinking or calling, within which the mandible is swollen and healed.
And if the reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not turned into their places, then visible fever and frequent urination occur, and very strong gas comes out of the patient's belly, and very strong vomiting of pure colic.
And when you see water, then know that it is a loss; and visible urination occurs within ten days.
Chapter. XXV.
On the Reduction of the Dislocation of the Jaw and the Extremity of the Muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the side within by its continuity to the foot; and some are dislocated at the outer end, and water is produced according to the feeling.
And the restoration of him is that the patient jumps on his back and extends his arms. Then return the place to your palm with a strong grasp, for it will return.
Then pause on that paste and cloths and strengthen that.
The end of that which sews the joint is continuous with that, is not dislocated at any time; then cover so that it is reduced and Engualada according to what we have said and according to your apparatus.
Then pause on that paste, and cloths, and tighten it, and order the patient to adhere calmly and to rest until he is healed.
And in this cure the end of the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Chapter. XXVI.
On the Reduction of the Dislocation of the Muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except by three ways, and one of these is that it is dislocated at the end of the titillac to the end of the thighs.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the end of its muscle, and this is done easily; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder, and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
And most often it is dislocated and comes out at the ends of the thighs towards the titillac, and most often in those in which the meat is little, it is dislocated easily; but in those in which there is much meat, it is dislocated with difficulty.
And very strong gas occurs in some men by percussion or pounding, and the muscle of him is inflamed with inflammation, and it is detected by water that has already been dislocated.
Then cover so that you desire water until you are sat on it, and then proceed in the cure of him.
And it is recognized that the dislocation has occurred when it is at the ends of the thighs towards the titillac; so that you distinguish between the muscle that is dislocated and the other one, for you can easily tell them apart; you feel the concavity of the muscle at the end of the thigh towards the titillac, where a hair, and to the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor raise it for all movements.
If it is dislocated from the foot or behind it, then you feel a clear sensation of touch, and it does not conceal itself.
And of this dislocation is made a slight reduction when it is fresh, and the patient is child.
And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to its ends; then pause the ties of the cloth at the end of the thigh towards the titillac, and raises the joint with strength into its place, and the minister raises the hand of the patient, and extends it in front of him; and then pause that at the back because it returns easily.
But if by water that we have said does not return, and only from the beginning that the dislocation occurs, then wait for a few days, then cover him with blankets so that he is warm and relaxed, and apply oil to his joints so that they are softened and relaxed, as if his joints were broken and tied up, and fenugrec, and melilot in water, and administer it.
Then let the patient lie on his back and be paused at the end of the thigh towards the titillac with a blanket, waiting for wool that is placed between levitation and tightness, and then let the doctor pause his leg on the spine, and raise the head of the muscle by virtue, and throw the hand of the patient so that it is not raised to the ends, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not raised to the ends, because that quickly returns to its place.
If you wish, you can reduce it in this way: and know that you should be present with the man who is longer than the patient, and is on the side of the joint, and enters his muscle at the end of the thigh of the patient and raises the thigh of the patient towards the back within which the patient hangs suspended by air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the ends of his abdomen. But if the patient is easily dislocated, then know that it is so because another cause is suspended, for this reason that the dislocation quickly returns.
And it is reduced by another way: and know that it should be placed on the ground a long staff whose head is round in shape, like a mortar, which is not thick or small, and then pause on the staff at the end of the patient; for you pause on the staff above the head of the patient, and the patient stands according to the length of the staff, and then extend his legs from the other part with force, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if the reduction of him is difficult because of all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and know that you take a staff whose length is twice as long as the arms, and whose width is four fingers, and whose thickness is reduced in the tip of the titillac according to this shape:
And over the head let there be a soft drape to keep the patient's head from moving around.
And let the servant stand away from the patient's feet, and extend the hand or arm above them, so that he reaches between their legs, and holds him by his feet, holding on to the sides and arms, and the end of the hand.
Then let the arm stand on a step according to its length, and the hand be extended between their legs, and the other thing be suspended from the other side, for the joint is between them both.
And when the instrument is complete in accordance with any manner that is possible for you, and then cover it with a quantity of woolen yarn; and place plaster prepared from powder of millstone and egg-white over all the muscle, so that when it is turned upside down, and then tighten the yarn around the joints; and let the limb be turned over the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to his neck, and let it lie still, and not be moved for seven days.
And when the patient' food is little enough that the member can be comforted, for it is lighter to the recovery of him.
Then let his food be given in greater quantity every day and let exercise be made; and if it does not soften and become easier, then he is healed.
And if the joint is displaced by moisture that occurs to it or by any other cause, then let three punctures be made there according to what was said in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this still does not heal and seven days have passed and the plaster and the tightness are little removed from him, and the joint is not set in place, and the punctures and stricture are little reduced on it, and he cannot raise his arm to his side, then you will know that the nerves of him, which are at the top of the muscle, have been cut or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint will never heal in its place.
From the displacement of that which is caused by the foot and the nipple or rear joints, reduction is done with a push and extension to the ends, as long as it does not return.
Then let another tightness be administered there, and heal that before he is healed.
And if a heavy injury occurs to the member and delay in his movement, then let the patient use warm baths there before that injury is lightened and he returns to his nature first.
Chapter 27.
Of healing of joint displacement.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is displaced with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and that is displaced at all joints, especially at the front ones behind, and the displacement of him is not hidden from you because it is caused by the rope or touch according to some figure is displaced, and when you adjust the shoulder that is displaced with the hand, then let him know definitely, because the joint is bent and he cannot bend his arm or touch at it his own muscle.
And when you have the shoulders and reduce the displacement as soon as it comes to him an emetic cautery, because if you look at the emetic cautery, reduction of it is difficult, and it is not easily healed from all; and more so when it is behind the joints, for it is worse of all the other types of joint displacement, and more painful, and let certain death occur there.
And the restoration of him, when that which can be healed is reduced, is that the hand of him be extended with two hands, and his arms are spread out, and the sides of his body are over the shoulder and away from it, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers or the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
And if the displacement is in front of the joints, then let it return so that he bends his hand with his own hand, as long as it does not strike the shoulder with the tip of his hand.
And if the displacement does not obey reduction, then let violent extension be administered and let it be very strong.
That is that two ministers extend the arms, and have that emetic from two ministers so that it is not remanded before extension.
Then let the arms be turned upside down all around, because it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over the hand of him, or limb.
And when the finger touches the joint with its own hand, then let that be unwrapped with some oil so that those causes which help in lubricity of the joint are eased; and then push the joint with violent pushing until it returns.
Then let the reduction of him be made there is wrapped in a paste on which stringency and accuracy are applied with egg-white, and let it be extended with a stricture downward, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and left alone for several days.
Then let it be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the limb of him and leave that alone.
And if you see the joint is not stronger, then you repeat the plaster and the limb, and leave that alone for several days before you extend it again; and then loosen that.
And if a heavy injury occurs to the joint and its movement is in difficulty, then let dampness be administered in a bath and subtle friction, and pressure, as long as it is lightened; or pause above the joint and let it lie, so that it does not move quickly; and then tie it, and leave that alone, leaving it over the bone for a day and night. Then loosen that and put it in a bath; and when it softens, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat on that which is relaxed, so it makes noise of movement, once, and again, and the third time. Corruption has already come about in the innermost part of the bath, before it is cool.
And if you want, pause above that cow's wound wet and sharp with the edge and stretch it over that; and make some cuts there, because that is wet and reduce its movement.
Chapter 28.
Of healing of joint displacement of the shoulders, which is between the arm and the hand.
A few veils of the hand are displaced, and reduction of that which is displaced by him is little, but the opposite is true of all other joints; however, if it is rapid in reducing it within an hour when it is displaced, then let him be treated with a cold emetic or its own cautery.
Then let the reduction of him be that you pause the joint of the shoulder on a table and a minister extends the hand of him, and the side of his body pauses its own hand or its own palm over the edge of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
However, if the palm is already shown to the stomach of the hand, then let the shoulder pause its two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the displacement is before the hand, then let the two hands be placed intricately on the table, so that the side of his body boxes over that edge of the joint.
Then if he returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then let him be tightened with paste and the emetic applied to him and left alone; and do not repeat that, because unless several days have passed it does not suffer or can heal by you because of the reduction being slow.
Now however the Roman joint according to its tortuosity; and there is no cause for the patient, but that the hand is softened and cannot be strengthened for any reason; then know that the nerves are torn or broken, and there is no chance of it being a strong hand except by cauterizing properly and strongly so as to confer some cause upon him.
Now therefore when the patient's malady has returned, then pause over it and make it solid and firm for a few days; and then untie it and exercise his hand.
Now if the movement of it is stopped and happens to it some gravity, then soften that by water and friction some veils, so that it may be relieved.
Chapter .
On the treatment of dislocations.
Some veils are dislocated from the beginning.
And when a digit of those between the two palms or the belly is dislocated, then make it stiff and push back the dislocation by the fingers, so that it returns.
And then support the top of the digit and hang it from the part where it is dislocated for two days.
And then hang it up and stretch it out so that it may be re-joined in a day or two.
And when it is healed, let him follow that narrative and do not cease to untie it in the day and exercise its movement, and let him sleep at night; and make it stiff for a few days.
And do the same to him if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and let him lean on that part and make the first operation of the fingers, so that he may be healed.
In the same way, do to him when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Chapter.
On the treatment of dislocations of the spine of the hand.
When a complete dislocation of one of the joints of the hand or neck happens to it, and there is not a proper cure for it, because death threatens the patient,
This means that the patient's excretion is outside his will, and he cannot keep it in; or that certain members of his body, such as the arms or legs, become soft or withered away; or that one of the joints of his body becomes stiff because certain veils have fallen away from their places.
Then it is said to be "gelbozitati".
The cure for it is that you shall consider if the stiffness occurs from pus, because there is neither a cure nor healing for all of this.
Now in those which are caused by a blow or by a fall or by chance to the others, the ancient doctors had long-winded ways of treating them, of which the least returns to the profusion; and I have already found it out and renewed it from that which is too much of it, because of my nearness to it and my exposure to it, at which I have come to admire and form a different instrument than that with which I will show him and spread it out.
And those are not healed except that which happens to the hand, of which I have already told you.
And that the patient be extended on his face over the table with a towel spread beneath him, and that the instrument which moistens him be held away from his foot.
Then a stick is held upright, set on the ground at the end of the foot round his head, and another stick is placed under his feet at the other end of the foot.
The servant should hold the stick, and not place it in a pit; and the other servant should hold the other according to that form.
Then wrap your head in a towel and release the hair clips gently on it; then extend the end of the braid with the stick which is meant to support the head, and let that stick rest on the ground; and then adjust all the hair ties and let them hang on the other stick which is meant to support his feet.
Then the servant should drop the hair down to the end of the stick, and not let the two sticks and hair ties rest in such a way; but however, I have already told you.
And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns to its place, or that he places it on a table, and then he should adjust his feet on the table until it returns to its place.
Now if it does not return with this form, then take a table whose height or length is in the air of three brasses, and dig into the wall where I have said that it is proper for the patient to sit at which end of the table; And then the table should be placed on the spine of it, and the doctor should place his feet on the other end, and raise his back a little so that the spine may be drawn in and return to its place.
And if you want, open the door which is turned towards the back; and it is that you stand on the ground, and let the patient's head be in the back of two sticks whose length is a palm, and the doctor's feet should be in the back of two sticks; and the distance between each stick should be a palm, and that is where he turns his back to it; and each should be stopped from falling by digging into the ground.
And there shall be one stick turned around which is the door; and it should be turned in both ends of the two sticks.
And in the end of it is a stick which forms the turn around stick, whose length is a palm to which it is turned; and in the other two sticks is similar to that.
And then adjust the hair ties that you have made straight in the foot of the patient in the turn which is meant to support his head, and those hair ties that you have made straight on his feet in the door which is meant to support them;
And then each turn and a servant should twist the door with his hand, and the doctor should fix the spine according to what I have said.
Then when the spine has returned to its place and is covered with a dried-up cloth, then put on it a covering of wool, and then stop it; and then place it on a table whose height is three fingers or more, and the length of it is such that it covers the place of stiffness, and on the end of the spine which was stiff.
And then be tied with the hair which I have said; and use the patient' subtle nutrition while it is healed.
And if there is any urgency in the place where the cure ends at the end of the healing, then you shall cover them with medicines which soften and smoothen, and also with the long-term administration of the table which I have recommended; and it has already been administered to them in that place a layer of lead.
And in some cases there is an imminence of death from the end of the spine of the hand, and it has already been mentioned by me for which reason I do not cover you with this medicine, because it will surely cause your death;
Chapter .31.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip
Do you know that the joint of the hip and the muscle do not differ from each other except for a slight dislocation and concave shape.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways; it is dislocated inward, outward, forward, or backward.
Most commonly, it is dislocated inward, and less often forward or backward.
And the sign of a hip dislocation inward is this: when you adjust the patient's hips, the hip on the affected side becomes longer and the iliac crest further away than that of the sound side; the patient cannot bend their hip, and the point where the skin begins to break is farther forward than usual, so that the top of the buttock has come here.
The sign of one who has a hip dislocation outward is this: the patient's legs become uneven; the affected leg becomes shorter and the iliac crest closer than that of the sound side; the patient's back becomes curved, and the point where the skin breaks is farther backward than usual, so that the buttocks are reduced.
The sign of one who has a hip dislocation forward is that they expand their hips to the extent of their comfort, but do not bend the affected hip; and if they try to walk, they cannot step on their front foot; their urine is retained, and their legs become swollen, and their walking becomes difficult.
The sign of one who has a hip dislocation backward is that they do not expand their hips, nor can they bend the affected hip; and if they try to walk, they cannot step on their back foot; their legs become stiff, and the top of the buttock comes here.
The reduction of such a dislocation should be done gradually and with great care, for if it is an old and long-standing dislocation, you must administer it according to its nature, and not attempt any treatment that might aggravate it; and it is not appropriate to try any new method in such a case.
If the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types, then you should reduce it by turning the joint inward and extending it at its ends; and you should put it on the right and left sides, as it returns easily and does not require any other treatment.
If it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong poultice and extend the patient' hip at its end, either by placing it on its side or by making it lie on its back; and another servant should extend the patient' hand, holding it by the fingers, over the hip joint; and a third should tighten the ligature around the hip joint, holding it with one hand; and a fourth should hold the foot firm.
You should extend him either from the front end to the hip joint, or from the back end to the knee; and then you should place him on his side, facing upward or downward.
And you should make the extension from all sides in such a way that the patient' legs hang down freely and do not touch the ground.
This type of extension is suitable for all four types of dislocation.
If the dislocation returns to the way it was, then there is no need to worry; but if not, then every type of dislocation has its own treatment.
In the self-reduction of the hip, when it is dislocated inward, you should lie on your side with your legs extended upward; and place the ligature on the hip joint in the location where the skin begins to break; and then tighten the ligature so that the end of the leg is firmly held.
Then another servant should grasp the patient' arms firmly and extend the patient' hip outward with great force, as this dislocation returns to its own place.
This type of treatment is the easiest way to treat this limb; and in all other types of dislocations, this limb will reduce itself.
If you cannot perform this treatment because it is uncomfortable for you, then tie the two legs of the patient together with a strong ligature, holding them firmly on either side; and do the same for the two hips, tying them together with another strong ligature.
You should make the length of each leg four times as long as the distance between the hips, and you should extend the patient' back four times as much as their front.
Then you should hang the patient upside down, and you should make their legs four times as long as the distance between their feet.
Then you should have a strong young man pull the top of the buttock; and another young man should hang the patient by the feet; and the first man should pull up on the hip to return it to its place quickly.
If the dislocation is forward, then you should place a strong poultice on the hip joint as soon as it occurs; and you should tighten the ligature around the hip joint itself, and also around the patient' foot.
Then two strong men should be placed on either side of the patient; and then three more strong men should hold the legs together tightly, and one man should place a cloth over the patient' feet, so that the patient is not harmed by the leg being pulled apart.
Then each servant should extend their part and the doctor will administer the reduction according to art.
If the dislocation is forward, then the hips should be extended slightly; and this is according to what has been described above about the pueg; and the doctor places his hand on the patient' hip, and then he extends the hand with the little finger toward the back, and the doctor places his hand on the other hip, and then he extends it in the same way.
If the dislocation is backward, then you should not extend the hips at all, and instead raise them slightly off the ground; holding the patient in this position will cause the joint to return to its own place, provided that there is no other cause of pain; and if the hip is dislocated backward, as has been said above with regard to the treatment of a hip joint dislocated forward, you should place the leg on its side facing upward.
The compression administered to the patient should be at the joint itself;
Once the reduction is complete, as soon as you notice that it has succeeded and that the joint has returned to its place, then you should adjust two cushions and place them under the patient' knees; and with your hand on the hip, you should push the leg toward the back, and the doctor will put his hand on the other hip, and will push it in the same way. Then you should place a cloth over the hips, so that they are not harmed by the pushing. This treatment should be repeated three or four times a day; and the patient should remain at rest for three days or four.
Then you should remove the ligature and bandage, and compare one hip to the other.
If you see those bumps in a vise, then you will know that the dislocation is now closed; and so let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and spread it again, and extract it a second time as per your first stretch, and leave it for three days.
Then tie it up, and let it walk slowly on its own for a few days until it is comfortable.
Chapter .xxià¥€.
Of treatment of dislocation of the foot joint.
The dislocation can occur in three ways: because it is dislocated outward at the joints, inward at the joints, and forward at the joints; but it does not occur backward at the joints.
And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to apply the cushion to his crotch; then you will know that the foot is dislocated.
And the restoration of all kinds is that you make the patient turn on his right side, and let him stretch his legs out in front of him if he can do so; then to attach the knee joints with tape, and hold the patient's foot between his knees; and then to attach the foot to your palms, and place those between the patient's thighs behind his foot as far as it comes back to its place.
And the sign of recovery is that your cushion sticks to him; but if it does not, then he has not recovered.
Then tie it up and attach the cushion to him, and let them be tied together with a bandage for three or four days, then untie them.
And do not use the patient to walk for a few days; until he is healed and comfortable.
But if your reducing of him to you is excused, then administer the following: in the treatment of the heel, which precedes the narration of the cure in a strong way.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the heel.
The heel sometimes wakes up due to a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated in the complete opposite way, and the dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of dislocation is that the heel swells up to the joint from which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of moving him is a light recovery, and it is that he be stretched out comfortably on his back and then wrapped up tightly until he returns to his place.
But in the treatment of him when he is dislocated in the complete opposite way, cover that you command the patient to turn on his right side, and let another minister hold his foot firmly at the joint behind it, in its place.
Then you are to him on the right side of his foot, and to you on the left side at the joint of his heel, in its place.
Then you are to throw his foot to him on the right side, and to you on the left side for two turns, and then extend it with your left hand; and make the foot of the heel work with your right hand if needed.
Then make him turn twice as many times as you have counted.
Then tie his foot to the cushion for the third time, and you are at the joint.
So if he returns in one turn or two according to this way, and if his foot does not wake up, then repeat the operation on him, because he wakes up again.
But if you are forbidden to reduce him to you by water which I have recommended, then make the servant walk on his knees on the ground, and place a mat under him so that he does not feel the ground; and wrap a blanket around him, and place your hand on his hip to hold him in place.
Then the servant of him hold his hips, and another minister extends his foot towards his foot or leg; and the payssel is extended between the servant' s hips to keep it from falling over the joint in front of its extension.
Then the doctor heals him from his foot; and another minister holds his crotch to keep it from falling, because dislocation returns easily.
And now if dislocation returns and you declare to him the healing of his reduction, then pause and extract it firmly with a strong bandage; and tie his foot to the cushion.
Then if you fear or guard yourself from the nerves that are behind the heel, so that the bandage on him is not violent and he is firmly tied up.
Then leave it alone for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes soft, then extract it.
Then return it on the third day, and do not let the patient walk for 10 days. But if it is necessary to go ahead of the space, do not make sure that the dislocation is not over him and dissolved or corrupt; and let this be understood so that you do not receive a cure.
And if it happens to him to throw away the drink in a way that is described by the following narration of treatment and cure, then let another minister give it to him somewhere else for healing; but if it wakes up again.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of treatment of dislocation of the toes.
If the dislocated foot is wrapped up tightly a few times, then it will wake up slowly; and if it is not difficult, it will walk in advance.
But if the dislocation is in two toes of the foot, then cover that you make the patient walk on his knees on the ground or a table, and let him do so as if he were walking; and if it is not difficult, it will be enough.
Then you are to stand on your heels, and hold his feet over the joints, and let them move with their own strength until they return; then make sure that he is wrapped up and does not appear in its place.
Then place the foot of the patient on a table that lifts up the whole foot, and let there be two hands on it, and hold them with their strength for three days; then return it to the ground, and let him walk slowly for three days until he is recovered and the healing is assured.
Chapter  .xxv.
Of the types of dislocation that are caused by plague or fracture or some other way.
When any cause of those occurs to you, and if you are involved in the treatment of that disease and the restoration of him, you will see a number of deaths succeeding one another.
And by no means do you brag about the cure of him; but let that man who is skilled in the art treat him with patience and kindness, not impatience or arrogance; and may he use a number of potions to ease the pain slowly, and leave the patient to God's judgment. But if you expect salvation from ruin, treat him with alleviate medicine, and if there is any hope. And then try to heal him as soon as the cause appears; but not after the disease has caused a fever.
And then if the member returns as it is supposed to do; but administer a potion that causes a fever slowly and heal him from the plague by water that you pour on him with dried leaves.
And if the dislocation is from a broken bone and occurs in the part that is separated; then try to treat him with surgery, and make sure that he does not drink any water that has been said about simple medicines of water that is used before.
And you keep and avoid according to your strength those things that are in the way of fear; because water is better for him than you do your own Creator, and may you remain firm in your glory, and may you salute the Lord' s body with it at all times. So ends the words of Al-Bubakar accurately from which God be pleased. Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
