O sons, I present to you this book, which is the final treatise on medicine, for the sake of completeness, it follows from it that its conclusion is in it, and because of its explanations and declarations, I consider that I fulfill that which comes before you with respect to this text, which is a description of the operation of the heart.
Since the operation of the heart is laid out in our region and at our time entirely deprived, then very few perils lie in the science of it, and its vestiges remain; and they would not have been except for a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which changed their most things and placed them in error and confusion within that which is closed in their interpretations and is extended in their force and art.
It seems to me that I have brought to bear in this treatise the order of things regarding the explanations and declarations and brevity; and because it comes by addition to the declaration, and for the preparation thereof, which is necessary cause.
The reason why a good artisan does not master the art of surgery in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and because before it is necessary to know the actor's anatomy, which connects with the joints and separates them; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their names, as well as the movement of the veins, pulsating and quiet, and the places of their outlet.
And therefore I say that it is called by a name only in the small work, and more so in the art of surgery.
We have already said in the introduction of this book; for he who does not know that we have spoken to him about anatomy, does not realize that he falls into error because many people die as a result, and I have seen such errors in this science, for it is not a part of the knowledge of surgery, but gets its ideas from another science and experiments.
I have seen a doctor with a blade and an experienced one has made an abscess of a scrofulous woman in the neck, which burst out with much blood; for that she died between its contents.
I have also seen another doctor who took a stone out of a man's bladder, which was large, and returned it to him; and after three days that man died.
And I called for the stone to be removed, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the patient' s condition, it was clear that he would die.
I have also seen another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery; and he was going to operate on his crotch, which was broken, but prepared the doctor in his ignorance, removing the fracture, on the skin, with powder and needles to make it stronger, and did not leave the skin open for respiration.
And he carried out the procedure according to his wishes, and he prayed, and he left him with some days; and he ordered us to cut off the limb, so that the crotch was broken by the hole, and it came to destruction.
And I was called for it; and I prepared myself to cut off the limb, and I gained peace and eased his pain.
However corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so I could not restrain it, and I continued to walk with the corruption in the limb until the patient' s death.
I have also seen another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after a few days, until the evil of it spread to its lord.
The reason for this is that the sharp knife cuts off bad humors of the melancholic type; therefore, it is clear that it can reach everywhere, but it is a limb that suffers from all over the place.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of the heart be divided into two operations: one is an operation to save life, and the other is an operation to risk death.
I have already presented in this book all the operations of which I am aware; for some are necessary and others not, so that it is not appropriate to present them all here, in order to avoid wasting time in speaking and distorting your mind.
And therefore take your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your illnesses with compassion and firm resolution.
And use the best way, through the grace of God, to lead you to salvation and to the laudable succession, and leave your terrible illnesses with difficult treatment, and hold your weapons in such a way that it is not a cause for fear, so that you do not forsake your faith and name; for more remains to your glory, either in heaven or behind your sanctities.
I have already said in some of my premonitions: "Do not treat a bad disease, so that you do not become the cause of death of your patient."
I have divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered by chapters, in the shapes of instruments and tools used in surgery; this is necessary for the operation.
Division of the second part. The second chapter, concerning cutting and piercing, and suction, and extraction of arrows and similar things, completely divided and ordered by shapes of instruments.
The third chapter concerning restoration and displacement, and treatment of twists and similar things; this chapter is ordered by chapters, in the shapes of instruments.
I will tell you about the qualities of that cautery and the things necessary for it, and in what conditions it is prohibited to use cautery.
Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of cautery and the things necessary for it is long and extensive, and subtle in science, and hidden in meaning; and they have spoken about much knowledge, and they disagree with each other, and I am satisfied with a little of their speeches, as if they were long.
And therefore I say that cautery has all the qualities universally; it is of matter or two matters; for these are two qualities of matter.
In the combination of tail and dry matter will disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial to the fire, and others say the opposite, that cautery is not convenient in a disease which is by quality and dryness, because the nature of the fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that the fire should heal a dry and tail-like disease.
And he who says the opposite, that with cautery is beneficial in all diseases of tail and dry matter which are present in the body of man, because when you compare the bodies of men and the moisture in them to the combination of fire, you will find them dry.
And I say by the speech of that person, which I have experienced at times in order to discover.
However, it is not necessary to present here what has already been presented and exercised in the chapter of cautery following exercises, and learned the diversity of the condition of men and the disposition of their diseases, and the causes of them, and their accidents, and the space of time from those.
In other cases, there is no fear, and most often in wet and cold cases, since all doctors are agreed on them, and are not in disagreement about the cauterization of those cases.
And know, children, that of the secret of cure by fire and of the goodness of it, since fire is simple, its action reaches only to the member which is cauterized and does no harm to the other member which is put on fire with it, except for a small injury.
But the application of burning medicine reaches to that part in the member which is blistered, and causes great pain in the sick part, and it causes great difficulty in healing it.
But fire, because of its subtlety and goodness, does not burn but drenches; And I am already well known to you through experience and a long history of service in studying the truth of causes; and by this means I will excuse myself from the length of speech and if it were not that it is impossible for me to write secretly in this letter to you about fire, and the quality of its operation on the body and its expulsion by which it expels the diseases, with a philosophical demonstrative discourse, which would be clear in your cases.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to make a cauterization and pause for the best time in springtime.
I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage by time, which happens by accident, is immersed in the healing of what is cauterized, and most when cauterization is for pain or necessary pains, which do not suffer delay, because those who come with ill-will are greater than a small injury entering by time.
And then you do not use it in your cases, or children, this is only estimated by the vulgar and foolish doctors; so that for that disease which is healed by cauterization, it is convenient to pause at that time, and this consequence follows.
And the cause is not good for such a thing; because cauterization is only a place of medicine which alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause by which pains come.
But, nevertheless, superfluous cauterization over the medicine is because of the virtue of its effectiveness and the greatness of its power, and the lord knows it well.
And it is possible that the disease return at any time of the year, according to the constitution of the patient and the location of his illness, and the goodness of it; and because it is prepared in his body by adding superfluous things in his diet and by resembling those causes; but if the disease on which cauterization was administered is a subtle one in a member with few superfluous things and humors, then with cauterization of a tooth for pain and resembling that one, it is possible that the pain does not return to him, but remains there.
And the common speech is that cauterization is the last medicine; and it is a hasty speech, not to those who understand it, because they believe that there is no cure which profits from medicine or any other cause by means of cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauterization is the last remedy is only when we administer ways of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not give; but at the end of the cause, we administer to him cauterization, and it profits at that end. And from here, I will tell you that cauterization is the last medicine of a hasty speech, not according to my understanding of the vulgar and silly doctors.
And they say that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they do not say it except for the equality of gold and its subtlety.
And they say that the place of cauterization does not burn, unless it is absolutely good, because I have seen and touched that it does not burn except in some parts of the body; and cauterization with gold is good for them, and better than iron, as they say; but when you make cauterization with fire and gold, it is not clear to you, because it depends on the quantity which you want for the roughness of gold, and because it prepares itself to receive fire; and if you put a piece of metal on fire, so that the craftsman catches it by the occupation of that metal.
And to do this, you must put iron gently and then perform the operation correctly.
And I have already ordered this chapter about cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those of the first part within the feet, so that it satisfies what you ask for.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on humidity and cold the accidental service of which there are two causes; so it is a cause of sweating and many fluxes of blood, causing a headache, flowing from the ears, and many sleeps, and pain in teeth and gums, and generally of all illnesses that come by cold, as well as paralyzed, sweat, and apoplexy, resembling those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, command the patient that he be evacuated by lacting medicine to his head, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the goodness of the disease and the age and custom of him; then put on his head a bandage and wrap it around his head, and wrap it with a cloth, and let it rest for seven days.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place it on a bank between your legs, and place your hands over the roots of his hair.
And then pause the movement of your hand from your palm to the roots of the nose between his ears. But, nevertheless, when the patient speaks about his own place, sign it with a mark; and then set fire to the olive oil from which this is the form:
And then put that on the spot with a mark, in a way that it sinks, and by which the patient's hand is constrained little by little, and you turn it.
And then raise your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see any quantity of hair, as well as the amount of blood, then lower your hand, and if it does not feel cold, then it is seen from the bone that I have told you about.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days.
And then put it over the ground covered with sawdust and leave it there until the fire destroys the scale of it. And then cure the spot with five-fold tar within which be healed.
And it is said that if the plague of Rome is spread, so much better and more healing is it; for it is more beneficial and pleasant.
They also say that the jaw should be cauterized within the bone, and that the cauterization should be performed so that part of the root of the tooth is moved away.
And then it is done; it is shaved close to the bone, and then it is healed.
And they say that the cauterization reaches to the last part, within which is forced against the bone, and this is the form of the blade: They recommend that the patient breathes the vapors from his head.
And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and let it be healed before it is hardened.
And I do not see these two kinds of cauterization in all places for the sake of fear; and let it be left to me, a thousand times better is salvation when it is present; because the head can be detached by solution of continuity as long as we have witnessed it in other members, especially when the patient's head is of freewill nature.
And the kind of cauterization that first comes is safer and better for me; and from there, I will choose that operation for salvation.
Capitol Second.
Of the cauterization of the head.
When in the whole head chronic and long-lasting pain occurs and it is prolonged in the patient, and he uses plasters, leeches, bloodletting, emollients, poultices, and poultices, especially if he has already been cauterized with a caustic and does not take advantage of any of those causes, then consider that since the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not pleasant and brings about great harm, then cauterize him with another kind of cauterization, let that one be few. Then cauterize that on the tip of his head with a caustic inside so that the knot is broken. Cut the knot and reveal the bone the quantity that we have counted and cauterize it at the back of the head in a place called "vas" — and that is the place where wind is stopped. And thank God in advance for that, and do not reveal the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain, which is different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And direct this cauterization to its place, because, while that caustic with which the tips of the head and the occiput are cauterized is subtler, that caustic with which the back of the head is cauterized is more powerful. And this is the way to do it.
Capitol Third.
Of cauterization of the emigrant (not ancient).
When the pain in the back of the head is hard, or the pain inside the ear is standing, let the head be evacuated by medicine while it is spoken, and let the other treatment (which I have described in the various diseases) not be taken advantage of; then cauterize it with two methods: either with burning medicine or with iron.
Or cauterize with burning medicine is that you take a bucket of water, and pour it out and burn the ends of it from both sides. And then cut the place that causes pain in the temple with a sharp needle inside so that it is hidden under it; then cut off the knot.
Then hold it down with a firm constriction, and leave it like that for three hours; then remove the bandage, and keep the wound open for two or three days, and then put it under water in a bowl within the place where it hurts.
Then cure it with oil until it is healed.
And if you want, prepare some of the burning medicines that I have written in two treatises on burning medicines.
Or cauterize with iron according to this method: this is the way:
and it is called a claw because the head of iron is thus shaped like a claw, and in its middle part there is a small protuberance.
Then place it on the place that hurts, and hold your hand back so that the iron is not heated too much; and rotate the small iron slowly.
And if the amount of iron that is heated by the shape of the knot is about half, and raise your hand up so that the artery is not heated too much; then let the blood flow away.
Then dip the cloth in salt water and place it on the place, and leave it like that for three days; then remove the cloth little by little along the edge, and cure with oil until it is healed.
If you want, cauterize the end of the knife according to the cauterization that I have described, and beware of cutting the artery in this emigrant (not ancient) head.
Capitol Fourth.
Of cauterization of ancient emigrant.
When you cure emigrant with water that I have described in the previous treatment, and which I have described in the various diseases, and do not take advantage of the treatment; and sometimes because of the disease that does not suffice to the water that I have described for the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then, while you are holding the cauterization knife, consider that you ignite it so that it whiteness (to make it turn white), since this means that the half-most part of it has already been burned; and then leave your hand up so that the iron does not become too hot; then rotate it slowly. And let the amount of iron be heated by the shape of the knot, which is about half; and raise your hand up so that the artery is not heated too much; then let blood flow away.
However, you need to pay attention to the continuation of the jaw, which is more useful for chewing; and that the tongue does not become too hot and that the nerves are not heated; and that it does not go into a spasm.
And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is being cut, for in cutting it there is a danger; and even more so at that which does not know how to do it with water and does not study or prepare it; and then leave the operation until the very beginning.
And I come to mind with the memory of the regulation of blood flow by the way that you have described; and in its place according to your method.
If this disease does not allow the above kind of cauterization and tolerates the pain of a head cauterization, then cauterize it in its middle part as I have described; and cure the wound until it is healed.
If you want, administer the cauterization that I have described in the chapter of stretching the iron with two knives; and this is the best kind of cauterization and most worthy.
Capitol V.
Of cauterization of ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear due to scratching and to the other treatment that I have described in the division, and the pain does not return, then cauterize it; and this is the kind of cauterization that has no name, and this is its way:
Then place the point of the knife near the ignition; and rotate it all around the ear as it is being turned, or along one side if the pain is in that side. Along with the knife's edge on the ear slowly and gently so as not to hurt the place with trying too much.
If the knife's edge stops at some points all around the ear, and then returns to its original place; then cure the places until they are healed.
Capitol VI.
Of cauterization of torture.
The torture that is cured and the cauterization is not more than the various kinds of medicines that come with blood; as I have described in the various diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the kind that comes with dryness or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that kind of torture with jerks and purgatives and gurgles; if you do not take advantage of your treatment, then consider that you cauterize the patient from three sides: first with the edge of the knife near the ear; second, a little bit at the back of the patient's head; and third, between two lips.
And hold the cautery in place against the opposite side of the hernia, for only in that way will there be relief from the swelling.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize this one in the right of the tip of the ear put on top a little above the horn of the head, and in the tempered other, the length of which was according to the length of the said foot, and pause your hand over it as if it were burned by fire, until the quantity of the bulk of the tissue of the codena is scorched.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special of the scissor, the form of which is placed in front. However, even more important it is that this one a little bit put on the back, and cover it up with a little bit of extra grease, a little bit of oil.
Then return the area to water that has been heated until it is warm.
Chapter VII.
Of the treatment of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and the treatments have not yet been administered, and there is no fever in the patient, then cauterize this one with four cautery: on all the horns of his head; and cauterize it at the same time as I said; and cauterize in the neck. And the way of the cautery is done according to what has been said.
Then it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, and then leave it; and return to water that has been heated.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cauterization of a blister caused by fire.
Cover it with large jerks and small pills, sprinkling them on.
Then return the head of the patient to the doctor who applied the paste described in the treatise on pastes.
And hold this for a few moments, for this is a way of cauterizing. Then return it to the doctor who applied the paste according to the order that I have already mentioned.
And if it heals well, then do so. Otherwise, then make three cauterizations in the last part of his head, which are placed between the last horn and the one above it, from behind to the front within the circle. And hold the thickness of the said foot between each cauterization, and return the cauterization to water that has been heated.
However, if the patient is drinking water, then do not make the cauterization in the middle; and if you find a strong addition, then cauterize this one on two horns.
Then return it to the patient where it heals well; and the cauterization should be olive-shaped according to what has been said.
Chapter IX.
Of the treatment of a parasitic wound and of softening the whole body.
Then return the head of the patient to water that has been heated, and cover it with a paste according to what I have said; then return the head to the doctor who applied the paste; and return the neck to the same doctor, and make three cauterizations on the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of these three people and their tolerance to the softening is great, then cauterize this one with four cautery on the spine, and immediately afterwards hold the cauterization by fire until it is scorched from the tissue of the neck, and hold your hand. Then return it to the patient where it heals well, and this one should be olive-shaped.
Chapter X.
Of the treatment of epilepsy.
The epilepsy should not be cauterized, but this disease is treated with fire.
Then cover the head of the patient at the beginning with a paste, and with the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division where the disease is great and tolerates the experience of medicine.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicine, then administer the pastes and masticating pills in front of water for two days, with good nourishment.
Then return the head of the patient to the doctor who applied the paste; and make one cauterization in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another on the top of the head, and on each horn of the head; and thus treat it. And if the disease is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize this one with the following cauterizations: on the spine of the neck, and on the spine of the back.
Then, according to what has been said above.
However, if it is a child, then hold the cauterization in this way.
Chapter XI.
Of the treatment of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted wet humors and thick fire, then cauterize this one with the following cauterizations: in having had paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a flow of air that declines into melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then return it to water that softens the brain according to what has been said in the division.
Then return the head of the patient to the doctor who applied the paste; and hold it over the circle, and pause it in the middle of the head.
Then the patient should be forty years old, and let him lie down completely.
Then return it to oil; and it is now ready for a lamb's skin. And put this over the fire with moderate heat, which the patient endures when it is warm enough. Then hold this one in the middle of his head in the circle, and let him lie down until he cools down.
Then return the patient to water once a week, and treat him with the other remedy of the two; or you can cauterize this one by making small points according to what has been said above, then treat it. This is a special way of cauterizing that softens the brain with equality.
Then return this one to oil that is gentle or gray in color.
Chapter XII.
Of the treatment of descending water in the bowel.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the bowel by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink water that softens his head, and keep it for all humors.
Then hold this one under the bath, and wash it with gentle soap for several days.
Then order him to wash his head, and cauterize this one with one cauterization in the middle of his head; and if it is the beginning of water in two bowels, or of the water of a vessel, then make two cauterizations on two horns.
Then cut all the veins and arteries that are left by the codeña; and make these cauterizations in the middle of the horns, at the same level as the temple.
Then keep away from flowing water when it is being cauterized; and if the patient's blood flows, then give him some medicine that is suitable for him.
Then I will bring you a paste that is made from the extract of arcias and free from those causes and careful about flowing blood.
Sometimes, it is being cauterized in the neck between two bones with two cauterizations made immediately afterwards.
Chapter XIII.
Of the treatment of old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are very old, flowing through the veins and arteries that are in the place manifest of the head defora and is verified that it is superfluitatz frías flecmatiquas, then cauterize that am cauteri which we have counted in le capitol beginning of water cazent in les huels, e am cauteri in le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses. And if you are in need of additional treatment, then cauterize that one on the whole of the side of the eye on the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XII.
On the Cauterization of Nose Odor.
When you have finished the medication that we have mentioned in the division and do not take advantage of your medication, then prepare and give to the patient three cups of wine; and appropriately cut his hair, and cauterize with a small cautery in the middle, with an olive cautery. And then cauterize that one with a nail cautery on the two eyebrows, leaving the hair in place, with a small cautery.
And keep away from the fire so as not to burn that one.
And this is the form of the nail cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the Cauterization of Palpitations of the Eyes of the Patient.
When the eyelid of the eye is swollen due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a small cautery of the moon shape; and this is how you do it:
And if you want to, cauterize on the two eyebrows a small amount with two cauteries in the whole area, and let them be elongated from the temples. And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery, more according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is dried up.
Chapter XVI.
On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Patient When the Furrows Are Turned Inward and Thrust Out.
When the patient's eyelids are turned inward, so that they protrude, then cauterize in two ways: either by fire or by burning medicine.
If a fire cauterization, order the patient to look down so that his furrows are turned inward, so that they are not burnt and become scarred; and if he looks up, then tie his eyelids shut so that they do not bleed.
Then, when they are scarred and turned inward, place the patient's head in the third position, and approach his eyelids with a needle, piercing them with a knot, and starting the knot right next to the furrows; and this is the beginning of the knot.
And then make a cut in white of an egg or in mucilaginous of a butterfly on the eyelid.
And then light the cautery, and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize on the figure that you have drawn, little by little, until the surface of the eyelid is completely burned, and it looks like a leaf of mint, all apparent.
And this is the sign of a successful surgery, that you see the eyelid of the patient already contracted and his eyelids elevated due to the puncture.
And then raise your hand and make a cut on it for three days, and then make a cut on the skin for the third day. And then heal that one with ointment until it is healed.
However, if the furrows return for any reason and the eyelid is swollen, then make another cauterization on it at another time, as you did the first time.
However, if the furrows are on the inner side of the eyelid, then cauterize in such a way that it is raised to its natural position and turned inward, so that the furrows do not touch the eyelid.
However, this cauterization with burning medicine: order the patient to look up so that his furrows are turned outward, and then let them be prolonged and turned inward; and then make a cut in white of an egg or in mucilaginous of a butterfly.
And then tie it with a knot, and with a sharp blade. I, Take those two causes together, and then mix them well, and make a paste of it so that it does not dry out; and then pour the paste onto the cloth that you have prepared in this way: form a leaf of mint on it; and place that one on the patient' side; and then cut off the ear with a sharp blade.
And then put that one on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bitterness of the medicine, because the bitterness is in the fire.
And then, when he feels the bitter taste, let him leave the medicine and make a cut on himself with a sharp blade; and if the cut does not hurt, then clean the patient' side with water; and then consider: if the eyelid has been raised in this way, and it is well washed, the surgery is successful; and if it returns to its original position, then it is unsuccessful.
And then make a cut on the skin for the third day, and then heal that one with ointment until it is healed again.
And you must take care that the patient not fall asleep during your operation, so that in the eye no drop of the medicine falls; and if the eyelid is swollen at any time due to the furrows, then repeat your surgery on that place where the eyelid is swollen, and exactly as you did it before, and then make a cut for healing.
And this is the shape of a leaf of mint.
You know that men's eyelids differ according to their size and age; and then you must adapt your surgery accordingly.
And do not copy the medicine of another, but study it in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Eye's Lacrimal Duct.
When you treat a fistula with the water that we have mentioned in the division of the eyelids and do not consult your medicine, then cover it up and cauterize in this way: order the patient to place his head between his shoulders so that his hair is not moved or disturbed when he moves his head.
And then make a cut in white of an egg or in a mucilaginous of a butterfly on the side of the eye.
And then light the cauterization, and this is the form:
A shape of a cane or a bird's feather, from one end to another, where the cauterization is made.
And then let it pass through to the other end. If you want it to be curved, then let it bend in this way:
However, if the curved one is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and take out the liquid and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the cauterization over it if it is well lit, and then make a cut on the side of the eye with a small cautery, so that it does not hurt your hand or the patient; and then put out the fire in this way:
And so if at the beginning of the cauterization the bone burns, it is good; and otherwise, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary, and leave it for three days, and place over that area a border and surround with an drying ointment until it is healed.
If after eleven days it has not healed, then place over it sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape according to what is appropriate in his chapter.
And another way to cauterize a fistula: go into the place of the fistula and stop up it with a thin piece of plaster and place your hand over that small hole from which the water comes out, and pour in there a little melted lead; and then, keeping it covered with dry plaster, don't let it come into contact with the skin of the patient, but cover that area with fresh milk or water, for lead clings to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula has been healed with water which we have spoken of in cauterization and cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction from the nose and reduce the fistula to its own place according to what will come out at its own place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Cauterization of a Wound from a Lance.
Mottled spots may appear as cracks in the lips, and most often in the lips of children.
So you heal those cracks with water which we have spoken of in the divisions and don't profit from your healing, then burn a small knife according to this form which is set out here:
And its cavity according to the subtility of a knife's blade.
Then place that carefully in those cracks so that the cauterization reaches the center of the cracks.
And then heal that with a pointed object so that it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an aphumation occurs and it becomes hard, and then it is broken, and then it is dried up, and then it forms a fistula, and then you heal that, and don't profit from the healing, then place that which has been heated to cauterize according to the quantity that has entered into the fistula, and then set that heated object on the opening of the fistula, and then let it reach the center of it with the hot iron, and then make a point on the back of the fistula; and then heal that with water which we have spoken of in healing, so that it is healed.
And if the wound has been cut and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover that place and burn the corrupted bone according to what is appropriate in his chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the Cauterization of Teeth and the Softening of Veins.
When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then heal those with medicine and don' not confer with it, then place the top of the head of the patient on the knee, and quickly burn a cauterization in the shape which will come out there, so that you do not pause the tongue over the tooth, and enter into that cauterized hot, and then your hand on the small one so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And then take your hand away, and repeat the cauterization a few times according to what you want.
And then place the patient's mouth under a stream of salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then stop it up, for the loose tooth is fixed and the softened gum is made strong and the corrupting moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the Cauterization of Toothache.
When toothache is caused by cold or by worms, and you don' not confer with the cure by medicine, then cauterize it in two ways: either cauterize at the edge of the cow's udder, or cauterize by fire.
Cauterization at the edge is that you take the cow' udder and squeeze it in a ring of iron, and then put a clamp on and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and quickly burn that which has been squeezed by the iron, and place that over the tooth which hurts so that it cools down.
And then repeat that several times so that the power of the fire reaches the roots of the teeth.
And if you see it, dip a cloth or clamp in the cow' udder and place that over the tooth which hurts, and place the hot iron so that it reaches the center of the tooth.
But the cauterization by fire is that you hold the tooth with your hand or a clamp and are careful not to break it, and then let the power of the fire reach its center, and don' t let the fire reach the patient' s mouth.
And then set that cauterization in the desired shape, and place that over the tooth, and your hand so that it cools down; and make a little water, for the pain may return or on this day or on the other.
And so that, by the power of that cauterization, the patient' mouth is filled with salt water and kept there for an hour and then is spitted out, and this is the form of the cauterization.
Cauterize in any extreme place that you can see.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter XXII.
On the Cauterization of Extrophulus.
When extrophulus is made of slimy and cold humors which are not obedient to medicine, and you see the digestion of those a little, then set that cauterization in the form which is this: having two open ends so that the smoke reaches the cauterization on the other side, and place that burning over the swelling once, and if it is needed, from the other end, so that it reaches the center of the swelling.
And if the swelling is little, then place that cauterization according to the quantity of the swelling, and leave it for three days, and place over it a cloth in the border so that it does not cool down quickly.
And then heal that with an ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the Cauterization of a Rash of Vows and of Constriction of Air.
When the humidities come over the lung, and most when the air is cold or damp, then at the beginning of the medicine which softens the lung, then cauterize that in the root of the larynx in the place where it has been covered.
And beware that you don' t burn the larynx or the lung with the fire or the charcoal of the wood.
Then cauterize that with another cauterization which is set at the joint of the neck in the last spine of the back. Let that cauterization be made according to the preceding manner.
And then heal that with water which has been spoken of, so that it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the Cauterization of Pulmonary Malady and Coughing.
When coughing and pulmonary malady are caused by slimy humors, and the patient does not have a fever or throat-ache, and it is old cough, then cauterize that with two cauterizations on the rib of the neck and another one between two breasts; and make the cauterization according to the preceding form.
And if you wish, may your cauterisation be punctured with the cautery that is called punctum, the shape of which precedes in the puncturing of ear-pain.
And may points be within the cavities; and appropriately cure those with water that precedes within them so that they are healed.
And when you have the three racks for cauterisation is made with one: with a single rack can make three cauterisations according to this form:
Chapter .xxv.
On cauterisation of tickling that is the head of the instrument.
When the head of the instrument is displaced by the cause of moist, lubricating and does not stop in the hour of its return to it's usual place, you should reduce the displacement within that it is returned to the custom water, and appropriately move a little it is moved so that it is thus, as we have testified, when first you reduce the displacement, and then raises the hook which is on the inside of the tickling from the start, and moves forward in this way with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is displaced to the inside of the tickling.
And appropriately ignite two-headed cauterises; and this is the form of it:
And appropriate cauterise the hook within so that it penetrates one to the other side; and then will come the figure of cauterisation after four-headed cauterises.
And some rack is adjusted according to this count, and for these are the cauterises .viii.
And appropriately place over the cautery that is called salt, and appropriately make adhere the hook to quietness, and the member is not shaken by any time until it is comforted.
And if the displacement is to the outside and it is done so that it is returned, then cauterise on the muscle with the cautery that is called a clavil or a pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is mixed and the hook is healed.
Chapter  .xxvi.
On cauterisation of the stomach.
When it comes in the stomach to froth and moist within that it draws out from its connection and so increases raumases to it, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confer with it, then when the hook is on its back is raised up, and he extends his hands and his cushions, and appropriately cauterías it with three cauterises: at one cauterise leaves the foot per the quantity of a digit in a cautery called clavil, and at two cauterises leaves the sides of the two costs of cautery, within that is returned the figure of cauterised triangular; and he extends between those that are not adjusted that they will make poyredura.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the hook.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form is addition, And if you wish, cauterises with one large cautery in your mid-stomach according to this form; and that it be a cautery according to the form of circle according to this form:
And be cauterised the stomach puncturing to that from this cautery is frightened: and it is because you know about the stomach puncturing according to the quantity that you want to try, and appropriately cauteris it with one cautery in the points; and appropriately cure it with the treatment that precedes within that it is healed.
Chapter .xxvii.
On cauterisation of the broken finger.
When it ends in the finger with pain by coldness or by moisture or by thick wind within that from its usual connection is got by extra fluid exit, and if you do not confer with it, then when the hook is on its back is raised up, and try three cauterises according to this form: and this quantity of water is poured over the finger from the hip-joints, which turns the bed of the man.
And be the space that is between each cautery according to the thickness of the digit, and be the cautery according to the length of the right hand.
And do not try with one cautery move.
And if the quantity of water that is added is the quantity of the most part of the side of the hook, and if it is not standing; then it should be laid down, which has already extended his cushions, and raise its hands.
You can make these cauterises with cauterises that are called cutleries, when it is to you subtility and prudence in the art.
And keep that you do not try too much in the cauterisation, and be added the side of all the hook so that it is added to the whole body and reaches within the bowels, because the hook here is subtle; and know water.
Chapter  .xxviii.
On piercing of a boil on the finger by cautery.
When it ends in excitement or a boil on the finger and you want to know if that boil is in the flesh of the finger or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the finger, the hook has great pain and acute pain.
And if it is in the skin of the finger, then the pain is acute and great so that you tire the treatments of it.
Then when the hook is on its back is raised up; and appropriately try the place of the boil; and appropriately ignite the cautery that is called rag, the shape of which preceded in the other page. And make cautery with it and within that all the hook is combined, so that it reaches the cup-holder, so that it burns in the fire and heals.
And appropriately cure it with the treatment of other boils, so that it is healed.
And do not know that this form of cautery use is prolonged in the art of medicine which is known to have discovered some malicious diseases; however, sometimes it is appropriate to try this operation, however, more should be left on it for a while, and then better.
Chapter   .xxix.
On cauterisation of plauresis.
They said that the small cauterises of the teeth of the surgery are made according to this way that is a maker, and this is what you take from the teeth of the surgery long dry one tooth that is found, and be of the thickness of the digit.
And appropriately submerge it in oil and dry it out at the fire, and appropriately cauterien with one small cautery on that place which is between the connection of the collar to the throat; and with two small cauterises from the sides guidazi, one a little declining from the start that should be left the beard, and with two small cauterises in water that is declining between the fifth cost and the chin, declining a little to the behind parts; and with another cautery in your mid-foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauterises of the behind parts; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauterises of the sides of the foot, left the cautery that is between those two shoulders.
And do not know that you try with one cautery, and then be it in the form of the hook in the work.
And already said that some tricks are made with the men of cauterises that seem to be iron similar to fire and ignite it in that place which is between the ribs, so that they reach at that point to that boil and is a burning wound, as we have said in the boil of the finger.
No it is not feared that in this perforation the cautery will fail to be made, for when such things happen at the fistula site there is no cure.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the Cauterization of the Leg.
When you treat the leg injury of the horse, I have told you before about the treatment in the division and do not confer your treatment, then cauterize it according to three ways, all of which are true, one is that you make three cauterizations or four long according to the length of the leg according to the figure of the cauterization of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
And between each cauterization there is a thickness of a finger or a little less, and the manner of cauterizing is the same as we have said in the cauterizing of the foot, equally.
And do not compress your hand with the cauterization; and the horse be even on its two feet.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two flames, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the knife which is at the end of the leg which causes to run the nerve of the horse without hurting it.
And be your elevation with which you raise the knife according to the length of the leg, so that the cauterizations are made according to the thickness of the body.
Then introduce the two flames, ignite it, in that place which touches on the other side with the knife.
Then remove the cauterization; and there are four cauterizations.
And if you see that, cauterize with three flames of cauterization.
And you cure the cauterized leg that has not been burned by the sun for many days, because it is more certain than other causes that precede in the treatment.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the Cauterization of the Horse.
The cauterization does not burn in water but only in air.
When you treat the water injury with the treatments that we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then cover it up so that it is cauterized with four cauterizations on the circuit of the saddle, and one cauterization on the stomach, and another cauterization on the horse's back, and another cauterization on the leg, and two cauterizations between the spasms of the two legs, and a cauterization on the right foot, and another cauterization on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization is proportional to the thickness of the knife.
Then leave the cauterized leg so that it does not burn by the sun for a long time.
And you do not empty the horse of the treatment nearby the cauterization so that they are added to its two legs, and it goes down with its own weight, and it is healed by the help of God.
The form of the cauterization with which the stomach is cauterized is square according to the shape that precedes it, and this is that with which the two legs are olive according to their shape preceding them.
Chapter  .xxxii.
Of the Cauterization of the Feet and Thighs.
When the feet are wet with water and they have been filled with warm water, then cauterize the toes of the foot on the second toe of the foot in a circular motion, and raise your hand towards the cauterization, and do not twist it; then raise your hand, and do not turn it all back, because the warm water is lost.
It is the second cauterization according to this form: And then make two points on the thighs with two cauterizations, and one cauterization is made at the tip of each cauterization knife. And be the cauterization according to the length of the thigh: and I leave the back and the other one lower down at the middle of the thigh; and two cauterizations on each thigh.
Then leave the wound open for a long time so that no water is lost from it.
And you cure it with those treatments that we have said.
Chapter   .xxxiii.
Of the Cauterization of the Abdomen.
When the abdomen is sore from rubbing and moisture that causes to run the juices, it is the digestive virtue and the retaining one, which are in the stomach and the intestines, and it is cured with treatments of the treatment and do not confer your treatment, and sometimes the horse suffers cauterization by showing the virtue, then cauterize it with a large cauterization on its own stomach according to what precedes in the cauterization of the abdomen, and four cauterizations in the circuit of the saddle according to that which precedes, and one cauterization with a sharp knife; and a cauterization over the alcatin according to the alozis, or two cauterizations.
And if the horse sometimes suffers from abundant moisture and it tolerates it, then cauterize it on its own stomach and the intestines, and firmly join two cauterizations over the abdomen and close to the inguinas, because it is a perfect treatment for the health of which there is no cure.
Chapter .xxxiv.
Of the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When there is an old hemorrhoid or a thick humor that runs or corrupt moisture, it is cured with the treatment we have said in the division and do not confer your own treatment, then cauterize it with three cauterizations on the left side of the two legs, and one cauterization over the navel, and cut off the top two ditz.
And if you suspect that the horse's abdomen is wet and its food is not digested, and its face sometimes snots, then cauterize it on its stomach with a large cauterization according to what precedes; and one cauterization on the horse's back, and another cauterization on the leg with a sharp cauterization, and leave the cauterized leg for some time, and then cure the inside that is healed.
Chapter  .xxxv.
Of the Cauterization of Atheyl Aproximating the Absence of Them.
When you separate the atheyl, then your hand ignites the cauterization that is formed with fire. Then introduce that fire in the separated atheyl, and at the end of your hand enter so that the cauterization reaches the opening of the vein from which it comes out.
And make one or two points, because if atheyl is a horse, then cauterize each of them according to what we have said, and cure those with the treatment that we have said, so that they are healed inside by God's will.
And if you cauterize with a large cauterization on the alozis, it is more likely to heal.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the Cauterization of Fistulas That Are Caused by the Nature of the Horse in Its Joints.
When nature does not obey to the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is scared by it, he is healed with treatment.
And if at any time a vein bursts in nature due to old age, and the corrosion of dry moisture and corrupt moisture, then it is cured with treatment that is more subtle than what has been said before, and you take the quantity of its depth with the hand that touches it.
Then ignite the cauterization that is like fire. And then introduce that cauterization into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it touches the hand.
And go back over those areas that are burned, until the corrupted humors have been completely destroyed once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if a fistula goes into the body of the bladder or into the hernia, then be careful at all those places; and do not pour it out unless it is in a flesh area and you think that it does not penetrate.
Then care for the area so that it heals.
And if the wound is closed and the matter has been removed from it, and there remains no more of it for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely healed.
And if the matter is not left behind from it, then you will know that it has penetrated into the bone or the tendon of the foot, or that it comes from those causes for which there is a reminder in its place.
Chapter .XXXVII.
Of the Cauterization of Wounds.
When there is pain in the wounds from drying or from strong wind, and because of this the skin of the patient's thigh is wrinkled, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize each wound individually with a pointed cautery, starting from the center of the wound.
And very strongly cauterize the second with a small point, so that three thin lines will remain, and then join them together quickly.
Chapter.XXXVIII.
Of the Cauterization of the Bladder.
When there is pain and softening in the bladder from drying and from humidity, so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it at the beginning of the urethra with two points, one on the right side, and another on the left side.
And make the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the discharge; and cauterize it with one or two cauteries at the lowest part of the urethra, or with two if necessary.
And make a pointed cautery according to how it has progressed.
Chapter.XXXIX.
Of the Cauterization of the Mouth.
When there is pain in the mouth from drying and from humidity, and because of this incisions are prevented from being made, and the secretions of the mouth are corrupted, and the onset of their discharge is delayed, then know that the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as has been said in the cauterization of the bladder; and a cautery on the lowest part of the two, or two cauteries, and the last one should be pointed.
Chapter.XL.
Of the Cauterization of a Dislocated Ankle.
When the ankle is wet with mucus, and there are causes for its swelling at the beginning of its motion, and it is clear to you that the cushion is prolonged on the other when they are compared with each other, then know that: The dislocated joint is found in its cavity.
Then, having made the circle of the ankle with a pointed cautery, you will have to make an incision in its center, because you will not be able to determine whether it is to be extended on one side or the other; and so that the center falls into the place of the circle.
And make a cautery with which you will proceed in the form of cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not suitable for you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, and make the last one very large.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the severity of all the wound; and carefully care for the area that is cauterized.
Chapter.XL.
Of the Cauterization of the Sciatic Nerve.
When there is pain in the ankle joint from drying and from humidity, then the patient' body is deprived of the fluid that we have mentioned, and this fluid is bitter, then know that it is due to thick humors; and carefully care for the patient from humors that are foul-smelling, or from artificial humors, or from similar things; and cauterize it.
And the way of cauterizing in that case is according to two methods: either cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
The second is to cauterize it on the edge of the blade with three triangular cauteries, following this form; and make them of good depth. And make the space between each cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the blade; and if the cautery is large or small.
A few more words about cauterization: some people believe that it is useful to cauterize the back of the ankle with four cauteries, two on each side, to prevent pain in the future.
If you wish, cauterize the circle with which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocated ankle joint, and make it large, burning the severity of all the wound.
This is the way to cauterize in the case when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend within the cushion.
And if it is extended within the cushion, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the cushion at the place where the pain is; and one cautery on the shin bone for four times, a little less in size.
And if the cauterization is with a blade, and make the depth of the blade according to the quantity of the severity of the wound.
And if the pain is extended towards the feet, then cauterize it at that place with three or four points or more, if necessary, to prevent pain in that area.
And if the patient feels pain on the side where the pain is, then cauterize it with a blade at that place.
And be careful in any cauterization so that you do not burn nerves or cause great pain, and because of this, it is necessary to apply oil to the body, or to rub it with something soft.
You have already seen one of these, which I cauterized on the shin bone and finished it off in the cauterization, and the fire burned within the mass until it reached the foot, and the hole was pierced through the entire foot. Then a very great remedy for the stomach, and death soon came to him.
And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each one according to this method.
The wise men say in the cauterization of the ankle joint this is the way: make a circle of iron, of which the circuit is most of a palm; and make the hole according to the thickness of an apple or a little more.
And within each circle is another third circle; and make the space between them according to the quantity of the discharge from the foot; and let these circles be open at both ends; and this is how it is done.
Then let it burn within the fire until it becomes red and gives off sparks; and let it be placed on the edge of the ankle joint, so that it cannot move; and this is how to do it. And cauterize it with three pointed cauteries in one line.
Then let it be left for three days; then apply a paste to it, and leave the wound open for four days; and carefully care for it so that it heals.
Albu Cassius says: "Son, in this type of cauterization, we have not much used it because of the fear of burning; and because of this, few have found those that look at them closely.
May the best cauterizers be brought for him who suffers, and turn away from him that place where he is.
May the best cauterizers be brought for him who suffers, and turn away from him that place where he is; may the length of the pargeting in the náuglety of their sight be two noyes or quays which they have made by piercing the door with an arrow;
And if the space is between each amount of thickness; and they are opened up above and below, and may be so that they contain themselves according to this form:
And place your hand above the joint of the ankle while the patient stands on his feet, and compress your hand above the joint of the ankle; and bring water from a tail and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be as hot as you can, and suffer the patient the pain and the burning - so that it ceases the pain.
And then raise your hand with the instrument, and wash out the tail of the water from all the ankle with two-fold water.
And then leave him for three days and place over it the border until the blackness of the burning is refreshed, and leave water on him for some days, and run away from him pox-laden; this is latter in curement.
And then heal that with ointment, so that it be healed.
And if the pain is extended within the crotch or the chest, make him lie down in the position that contains water according to how it is made in the ankle engagingly.
This is the way of water tail, and I have already written that in the treatise of the correction of medicines. Recipes of the alkaline and of the non-substantial cause in both parts a, and twist them and place them on a new wave from which the part above is pierced with a little hole according to the quantity that enters into him.
And then place the rest of the wave of the wave that is enveloped, and get it over that alkaline and that lively cause of two-fold water that covers them through one hour; and then compress them with your good compression, and leave that wave that sends away him of the sharp water from the part above to the wrapped wave.
And then adjust all that water, and get it over another lively cause and other alkali renewed, for that in turn strengthens the acuteness of it, which is administered in little operations of medicine and in cauterizing the other members, because operation makes fire.
And then of some medicines that are cauterized broadly, as well as to dry them and to melt them with the same thing that is used to make it soft, and to mix them.
And Guilia reported of a man of the old age that operation and cure with which he was healed from the pain of the ankle and the sciatic vein, and she praised much his body because it is not necessary another cure, and because it is healed by itself; for such is the way of the world.
And it is to be taken of certain roots, and if not it is made green, then it is taken from the fig recently; and a little is twisted with a little grain and placed over the ankle where the pain is, or in the crotch, or in the chest, and be tied up.
And be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient is able to endure the pain.
And then put him in a bath and when his body is hot, enter him into the water, because the pain ceases and is healed.
You know that it is not necessary to make any preparation of cauterizing with these medicines, but only the purging of the body.
May Escorides say that when the vein of the goat is cauterized, it will be better; and let the cauterizing be made in this way: take a wool and moisten it with oil that is old, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the joints.
And then bring a dry goat's skin and make it smoke with fire, so that it be made charcoal; and then place him on the wool and leave him until it is dried up. And then repeat water, and do not cease the water until the feeling of the pain reaches the ankle and the pain ceases.
This way of cauterizing is called cauterizing of cows.
Chapter LII.
Of the cauterization of pain.
Some pains are due to two causes, as well through the contact or friction or through an excess of evacuation, and through similar causes, through the introduction of a foreign substance, and through the infusion of wet or slippery matter.
Cauterizing does not occur in any other way but in this single species that is made by the infusion of slippery matter.
So, then the purging of the patient with pills that resemble them, and are made according to the two ways in which the pain is felt; for it is necessary to make ten cauterizations in each line, because one does not know the tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of the medicine.
And let cauterization be made with a pointed instrument.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauterizations with a pointed instrument, making the middle one according to this form:
Chapter LIII.
Of the cauterization at the beginning of a Gilbosity.
Some pains are due to this malady in very small children; and the beginning of it can be recognized in the children's behaviour, because they do not like to walk or move about freely.
They feel pain at the base of the spine and at the tips of their toes, which are beginning to become stiff.
And then, when you see water and want to prevent it, cauterize him with the following form of cauterization: so that he takes cauterization all along the joint engagingly.
And if you want, cauterize around the joint with a double line of cauterization or three lines. Let the points be placed between them.
And then heal that place until it is healed with water that we have said.
May also be careful that cauterization is not administered in a Gilbosity, which is caused by spasms of nerves.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the cauterization of gout and of joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by liquid humours that infiltrate each part of the body, and hurt the feet, it is called gout by itself; but when it is felt in other parts of the body, it is to be treated as a different disease.
And then, if gout is cured by the use of medicine and does not come back, then the painful joints are to be cauterized again.
It is because you cauterize that place around the joint of the foot with a certain number of cauterizations.
And it is to be made of olive oil, which is made in this form:
When it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed instrument. And if the pain radiates within the knees or other joints and it is burning, then cauterize it on each joint with three cauterizations or four altogether with this cautery of olive oil.
And if you need more cauterizations than these, then cauterize it and do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery first, but only around the skin of the foot.
And if the pain radiates within the thigh and to the second hip, then administer the cautery that I have described in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the back and it is called sciatica, then make points on the path of the nerves there as they turn, making points on those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the legs, then make points on the path of the nerves on each foot and on the instep of the hand.
And if the pain radiates towards the sides or towards the muscles, then cauterize each one on all sides of the aid.
And do not evacuate the patient if they are not in good condition or have not received proper medicine, for if it is done with this cautery, healing will be achieved, God helps.
Chapter. xlv.
Of Cauterization for Breaks.
When there is a break in the inguinal region and the intestines are coming out in front of the hernia, and it begins to close, then return the intestine to its cavity and let the patient remain without food for that day and use mild treatments so that the break does not cause any pain.
Then follow the patient between your hands on their back, and order them to keep their abdomen warm so that it does not become cold or the hernia appears or the intestines come out.
Then return it with the fingers and touch the edge of the break on the bone of the rib with your index finger, making sure that it resembles the shape of a half-circle from one side to the other of the ribcage.
Then light the cauterizer in this way:
within so that it is hot and it sparkles. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient’s thighs and placed a cushion under them; another servant should be on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cauterizer on the mark with your hand holding it steady, and place it within so that you can touch the bone of the rib in the middle; and repeat this for the other side if you have not achieved it in the first attempt, touching the bone within.
Then observe carefully during the cauterization of the intestine to make sure that you do not burn it and cause death or some other great misfortune for the patient.
And know that if you do not have the bone in position when you operate with the cauterizer, your operation will be unsuccessful.
And know that for children, the cauterizer should be subtle according to their age and size.
Then clean the area of the cauterization three times a day with water so that it does not become inflamed.
Then clean it with the others within so that it is healed.
And let the patient remain on their back for ten days within so that it closes the wound and the plague.
And know that you should pause the nutrition of the patient according to the length of time for the treatment, so that the abdomen does not become swollen and the intestine does not burn due to the effort of healing.
Then after four weeks have passed, then administer it properly again and keep it for another four weeks.
And do not reduce your work or the amount of food and drink, and do not abstain passionately, for when you follow this regimen of complete healing, it will be achieved.
And you can extend the healing of the breaks in other parts of the abdomen, and begin it at the start, and do not stop, then cauterize the break with a small cauterizer according to its quantity, and clean it with water from the navel as well as on the third occasion; and clean it with water that has come out of the navel, and do not close it.
And some may say that the first break should be cauterized with a triangular cauterizer according to this form, since it is marked in this way:
And a line is paused for the length in the middle above the break, and another line downward; and your hand is placed on a claw-like cauterizer, but the first cauterization is lighter and better done.
Chapter. xliv.
Of Cauterization for Twisting.
When the pain persists in the limbs due to a twist or a blow and it lasts for a long time, then know that you should cauterize with a pointed cauterizer.
And the cauterization of the whole limb according to its size and age, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain.
Then if healing is achieved after the first cauterization, it is good; otherwise, repeat it; for it is usually due to punctures in that member that are close to another member, so that you can achieve healing with those cauterizations and the patient will be healed.
Chapter. xlvii.
Of Cauterization for Leprosy.
The leprosy in some parts of the body should be cauterized with great care, and mildly if the leprosy is caused by the decay of flame or melancholy.
Then if you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is caused by the decay of flame or melancholy; and if so, clean it with water that has come out of the division where it is located, and do not stop, nor does it reach the skin, and if you have any doubts about the corruption spreading throughout the whole body and all its parts, then cauterize it on the top of the head with four cauterizations: one in the middle of the forehead, another after the hairline from left to right, another after the hairline from right to left, and one behind the ears or at the base of the skull.
And last, place your hand on the top of the skull with a slight pressure so that it holds it firmly, and if necessary, add an extra cauterization; and clean it according to what is needed.
And if the leprosy has spread over the whole body and is manifested clearly, then know that you should cauterize it with the cauterizations I have described on the head; and on the tip of the nose, and on two points on either side, and on two points on each cheek, and on two points on each ear, and on two points on each foot, and one point at the base of each foot, and one on the back of each leg, and one on each knee, and one on the top of each hip, and two on each scrotum, and two on each testicle, and two on each thigh, and two on each calf, and two on each ankle bone, and two on each toe, and one between each foot.
And keep the nerves that are on top of the skull and do not burn them.
Then in some cases it is cauterized with one cauterizer on the rib and another on the stomach, and one on the throat.
And you should know that the more you adjust the cauterization, the better it is and the more effective it is; and you should know that there is no pain in the body for cauterization, because as soon as it reaches the joints, the body becomes numb.
And so, depending on whether the members and joints are large or small, as well as the type of instrument used for the cauterization, the cauterization should be done with great care or less care.
And so, take care in applying the cauterization by using a sharp knife or another tool to ensure it is done properly and correctly.
Chapter. XLVIII.
Of the Stupor of Gout.
When any member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize the numb member according to whether it is a large member or a small one.
And so that the small cauterization can enter into the essence of the wound just a little bit. And so, take care in applying it to those who are not yet healed.
And some wounds are cauterized that are located in the middle or in the feet, and those that affect the nerves that move that member, and it is remedied by applying a cauterization again.
Do not repeat this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the body.
Chapter. XLIX.
Of the Cauterization of Furor and Anger.
When old scars are not responsive to common medicine treatments, then you should apply a small cauterization to them according to the essence of the wound, so that the whiteness and the color of the scar are changed, and its color is altered.
And so, take care in applying it to those who have old scars and are not responsive to common treatments; use a mixture of olive oil and rose leaves, and the herb of arnica, as well as the powder of the oak apple or the yarrow leaf, all mixed together, and apply it to the affected area. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Chapter. I.
Of the Cauterization of Blood and Gangrene.
When a fever begins and you want to control it, then apply a circular cauterization to its course, so that it is turned around.
The wise said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in its location; but I have not seen this, because I think that it is ulcered, and I have already seen it a few times.
And it is better to cauterize it in its course by applying a circular cauterization as we have said, or a straight one.
Chapter. II.
Of the Cauterization of Bleeding and Gangrene in Meat.
When any softened meat is delayed in maturation, and thus it becomes too soft or old, or the meat is no longer fresh due to age or time, and you want to accelerate its maturation process; then apply a small, straight cauterization in its course, and let it rest; because it will quickly mature.
But if you want to pierce it with cauterization, then you should do so in the following way: and so, pause that in its location where it needs to be pierced, and let it rest until it penetrates into the meat.
And if the cauterization in that location is left alone, so that the member of the arm is relieved; and then take care to apply it where it needs to be applied so that it is healed.
Chapter. II.
Of the Cauterization of Bleeding and Gangrene in Meat.
Corrodent is a walking corruption in the member, which corrodes it as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Therefore, if you want to stop that corruption in its location where it suffers from fire, then you should apply a small, sharp cauterization with a pointed tool, and make it larger or smaller according to the location where the corrosion is taking place.
And so, apply cauterization to all of it at once so that you eliminate all corruption and do not leave any cause for worry.
And so, let it rest for three days, and apply a mixture of olive oil over the cauterized areas every third day until the scars are completely healed and all corruption is eliminated.
And then take care to apply it to flesh that is being generated.
But if the meat is generated in a healthy manner for three days without corruption, then do not apply any further cauterization to it; but if it does become corrupted again, then apply cauterization to those areas.
Corrosion is treated with certain medications at times with acute medicine, because that is halfway between a cauterization. But applying cauterization with fire can quickly heal.
The physician has already said that the cure for it is with acute medicine in the division, and so take it when you need to heal.
Chapter. LIII.
Of the Cauterization of Corrosion.
The claws of the bad-tempered dog that is called a claw are a great cause for concern, and they should be cauterized in two ways: with fire cauterization and water tail cauterization.
But applying fire cauterization is as if it were turning the claw into dust with a sound like the rustling of leaves, and it should be done according to the amount that the claw contains from the beginning, and its margin should be fine.
And so, return the claw to the fire, and then turn it around with your hand, applying the cauterization to its course until it reaches the depth of the claw. Let it rest for three days, and then begin to heal. And so, apply a paste of dried pomegranate leaves, and let the paste rest on it for a day; because that will eradicate its roots.
And so, take care to apply a mixture of meat-generating medicine to the area to ensure healing.
And if it does not convert, and certain areas of the body, mainly the arms and legs, experience pain; then you should apply a small amount of water to those areas, and that is as if you were taking a small piece of iron or of a whip, and pause it on the claw; and then pour a little tail of water onto the paste, and return it to its place, and you will hear the tail of water running into the claw's roots, and it will be taken away.
And so, apply to all of them what is necessary in the body.
And so, take care to apply medicine to those areas where the claws' roots are eradicated with medicine that is generated in the meat.
Chapter. LIII.
Of the Cauterization of Corrosion.
When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or due to fever caused by rubbing, or due to similar causes; then you should apply four small cauterizations or five over the joints of the two legs, between each joint with one cauterization; and on the feet' bones, and on the stomach, with olive oil.
And the shivering of him was quieted, and the health of the disease was hastened by rubbing.
Chapter V.
On cauterizing white accidents on the body.
When in the body white spots appear, and pustules are formed from corrupt dry matter; then, at the beginning of it appearing, let it be cauterized throughout entirely with a sharp cautery, its extremities being spread by fire; or with a long-bladed razor; or with a slow-burning cautery.
And some small veins are to be cauterized at the beginning of their discharge according to this manner; and they are not to be widened, nor is the overflow to be interrupted, doing so they become sound from those and healthy.
But nonetheless, when it is necessary that urine be discharged by the use of a bladder-flushing instrument.
Chapter LVI.
On cauterizing flux of black accident by incision of arceria.
Several veins of aresia that are cut should be cauterized first, as they may burst out; or the incision of blisters or cautery on a member, and then it is difficult to repair.
So, when you meet with any of these accidents, then bind it tight to the aresia's orifice, and place your hand over it so that the flux of black accident does not come out; and do not allow it to be lost.
Then place a few small and some large burning cauterizes on it, counting the numbers, and blow over them into the fire in order to ignite them.
Then pick up one of them according to the place and the accident in which the artery is broken, with swiftness before you repair; and then cauterize that vein within which has been abated, and restrict that flux of black accident.
And if the flux of black accident is driven out of the orifice of the artery as you repair and cauterize, then pick up another cautery, carefully preparing it on a fire; and so on, stopping the flux wherever the sanction is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve here, or that will come out upon the patient; and another evil may not come upon him.
And you should know that when the artery flows black, it is not possible to stop the flux of accident there, and much so when the artery is large; either by cauterizing it in such a way as to have said before, or by extricating it if it were not extricated, for when it is extricated the ends of the artery are burned, and the flux of accident is stopped, or that it be bound with a ribbon or a ligature by strong pressure, or that it be placed upon medicine of which its virtue is to stop the flux; and that they be strengthened with pulley or with strapping.
But that which administer's the restriction of leavings decent by way of a ribbon or by position of causes burns and it is difficult; nor does it confer any benefit.
But if this is necessary for some reason and not the medicine or medicine present, then open the stop to the indiction on the orifice of that vein, as we have said before; and understand a great restriction in the within which the accident is stopped from the superior division of the pain, and on the aresia let it be blown upon by cold water of great chillyness so that the accident is congealed and thickened; and also burn with fire where it should be cauterized or of medicine necessity.
On incision and piercing, and on bladder-flushing and bleeds, and of their appearances.
We have said in the first chapter all disease where cauterizing with fire and medicine is burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which those are necessary to the forms of cauterizes; and we order the chapters of the second division within the feet.
And let us proceed in this chapter by that method, so that it is avoided what he wants; then over what he wants let him have attention.
And before I begin with it, know that, as you learn in this chapter by way of example, what is for fear here is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And through the water that comes out from the bladder is in great care, for in the operation which is in this chapter white spots come out which are life-taking; the spraying of the vein or incision on a blister or the opening of an outlet or the extraction of an arrow or the incision of pain and their equivalents. And of all these fear and terror accompanies them, and in more of their cases death is.
And we warn you that of the above does not come upon you what is a difficulty; for some white spots are sometimes due to you from the manners of men of bad manners from the causes of diseases. And some of them is that they go away from their own disease and it is difficult to be taken away by the vehemence of this water what finds its disease; and for the long duration of this disease of theirs, and with respect to their disease that means death.
And these are those who give you joy and pleasure, whom you expect in good health, and their disease is destructive.
And so it is not convenient that you consent to a person in this manner; and your care be greater than your caution and your speed; and do not assume any reason for this without proper certain knowledge which certifies this water to be dangerous to you, and to whom the glorious succession of praise follows.
And in the cure of all your diseases by way of prognosis and indication to him who is saved, for in that is your aid in acquiring fame and memory, of glory and praise.
Oh children, God gives you understanding and does not leave you in direction or protection, for this water is in His hand.
And we have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to that which precedes in the chapter of cauterizes, of the cure of the head within the feet, so that it is avoided from you what you want from this water and from that of which you had need.
First Chapter.
On the cure of water which is held in the head of children.
And you should know that this accident of white spots in children is due to the birth, and when the fetus moves at first it opens the head of the child.
And some white spots are sometimes due to a hidden cause which is not perceived.
But we have not seen this disease in children except; and those whom I saw were dead, and so it was a noble work in them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the water in his head was increased by the great size of his head, so that the moisture was increased within it to death-burning fire.
And this moisture is added between the jaw and the cheekbone, or it is added behind the earbone.
For the operation in that case where the moisture is between the jaw and the cheekbone and the blister is scarce, then do you open in its place of the head by a crack in the side, and let the water run; this is the form of the sputum.
And so if the humidity is increased and the pus is larger, then these two cracks are according to this way:
And if the humidity is left the bone, sign of it is that you open the comers of the head completely and the water is pressed when you compress that one to the tieue hand at the comers inside and not there are wet. Cover so that you open in the middle place of the head three cracks according to this way:
And put the incision out completely of the humidity; and make the cracks strong with rags and plums; and pour water on it from above after five days, and cut away the ligature and cure the plague with poultices and anointings, and strengthen the head with equanimity; and feed the patient with dry food having little moisture until the member is healed and restored.
And another way of incision, that consider if the size of the pus and collection of water are different because some veiled places are in the occipital part, or in the comer ahead, or on the right or left; and so take the incision where the pus appears and the replenishment of water, and pour it according to what is best possible.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and lose life forces of blood and harm the patient because of this flow of blood to evacuate humidity.
Chapter II.
When there is an infection or fever in the lungs or feet, and it does not answer to the medicines, then the last remedy is this incision of those two arteries.
And so when you want to incise those that the patient has a bald head, and rub the place with rags to make the veins appear, and put some strong rag on the neck; and consider where the pulse is; and the places near ears are pinched, and in some men they do not show.
And so take the pulse on that artery and cut each one from above with the incision going in through the bone, and pour it because of the head's shape.
And if you want to, cut below the artery and trim what is necessary to the incision on the comers ahead.
And let the length of incision be two fingers' measure, for when a vein is incised the pulse grows stronger with rapidity.
More if the artery does not appear with touch, then when you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and so take the pulse and cut it in through the bone.
And then let what is obtained by counting the number of hands be a quantity of water. And so let it be strong in the hand if not a man or more, and that is according to the patient' s virtue and the artery’s replenishment.
And so consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the swelling, then cut it to prevent the pus from happening again.
And so make the plague strong with rags and with linen cloth, and so cure it with anointings until is healed.
Chapter III.
Of extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When an infection or fever occurs in the brain or lungs because of alcoholic humidity and because of the quality in the fabrics of the temples, or suddenly violently and resembling those, and is treated with medicines, then do not put faith in these methods of extracting arteries from the temples or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the way of operation and extraction of those is that the patient has hairs in the temples; and consider the artery that appears in the temple for it is shown by the pulse, and it is hidden in few men because of its velocity.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient be strong with some rag; and rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate it with water until the artery appears clearly. And so do you take this as a form: And so do you cut the vein with that ease until you reach the artery; and get it out of the comers independently until you extract that from the vein and discover that of the tunics that are left there, completely.
More if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the end of the bone, and so cut that one from a comers according to its quantity for the two ends of the bone are drawn out and joined together, and there is no loss of blood because if they were not incised the pulse would be lifted up.
And so evacuate the blood of a hand. Through three.
And if the artery is wide, then when you tie it in two places with strong thread of silk or string it does not break because of the pus’ consolidation and loss of blood.
And so cut off the superfluity that is between two ligatures; and do it at that time or another.
And if you want to, cauterize it with cauterizing iron within the bone before incising the two ends of it, and place it in a place that is ready for that work.
And it is better work than the patient has fever or a hot complex; because cauterizing helps to stop the humidity’s finish, and so is better for healing.
And so extract the arteries that are in the temples, which are hard and dry, and put it on a clean cloth, and make it clear with medicine that makes the flesh well and the blood stops flowing into it until it is healed.
And if while you open another vein that is coming out of the artery’s blood, then do you bind to stop that blood, or cauterize it, or put it on a place; and strengthen your hand within so that the blood stops flowing. And if any cause of that is not with you, then pause the thread above the place where the pulse is stopped, and put it on cold water within so that the fever stops returning, and make it strong according to how it was before.
And so the blood is extracted from the artery is that you cauterize the vein with that cauterizing iron having two knives, because you open each one with effort igniting it within so that it reaches the bone and cuts it in two places, so that the blood be elongated between both ends of it, because it is not consolidated by that cauterizing iron.
And this is the way of the cautery:
Let be sharp the two knives’ edges. More if those are not sharp, then let two knives be of the same sharpness because it is better for each one to cut at its own speed and not incise the flesh quickly.
Then if some are thick, let the fire’s heat be held in those and the flesh is cut lightly.
And this work is better in every work and lighter.
And be the space between two knives the quantity of the thickness of the thread.
Chapter IV.
Of the cure for weeping and sour blisters on the eyes.
When the sour blisters occur on the eyes and are in the forehead of the patient, then do not put faith in medicines’ remedy, and the face of the patient is already swollen and it is painful to look out; and these eyes with those little hairs are irritated by the acid liquid of tears, and the work for those eyes is tiring, and the skin of them is torn with the acuteness of the tears, and they do not give relief.
And so you command the patient to lie down with his or her hair over their face, and make three incisions on the forehead that are equally spaced out according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally spaced out according to the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second one should follow the length of the lacrimal, and the third one on the other side.
And be careful of the incisions in the arteries that are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space between each incision is three fingers wide.
And if you have a sponge of white cloth that is dry and clean, use it to apply the medicine.
Then take the spatula with two sharp ends, for this is the shape of the incision on the patient’s back: which goes from the first incision to the second one. Then cut off all the skin that is between two incision lines on the spine, and do so from the first incision to the second one. Then take this spatula and insert it into the first incision again, an instrument called chisel on one side, and not on the other side.
Then cut off the hair from the patient’s back, and from the spine itself, and insert it into the middle incision, and cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the arms.
And so the incision should continue as it goes down along with the skin, and do the same in the middle incision before going to the other one.
And then pour a certain quantity of the medicine onto the patient’s feet that are cold.
Then put a little piece of cotton in each incision, and place it on the dirt that is mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and apply it so that it does not cause blisters.
And on the third day wash it well with warm water, and apply oil of rose and other remedies to make the wounds heal.
This is a complete translation of the text into English:
For the cure of headaches by catharsis and for the vessels that descend from the head.
When there is acute pain in the head due to catharsis and the vessels that descend from the head, if they are very weak, then take small pieces of the patient’s hair and cut them off, and with regard to their improvement, their swollen eyelids, their ulcers, and the hairs on their scalp, and with the pretense of the head, if there is sharp pain and extreme sensation, know that these things do not come from the blood vessels that proceed from the inside parts.
And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to lie down on his or her forehead, and make a single incision in the middle of the forehead, a little long (and start the incision from the temple on the left side entering into the right one; and it should be made under the bone; and extend your hand along the lacunae of the temples, which are wet with saliva), so that the bone is exposed.
Dry all the skin on both sides with a sponge or dry cloth, and fill it between the two lips of the incision with cotton wool or a cloth. Then apply vinegar-soaked dirt on them to prevent blisters from forming.
And when the blister has decreased or disappeared, then take some flour from wheat that is twice as fine and fragrance four times, and mix them together, making a paste of it, and apply it to the patient’s skin with the intention of treating new flesh, just as if you took two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, mixed them together, and made a paste of it.
This is the complete translation of the text:
For the cure of water that is heard in the ears.
All causes that produce noise in the ears are four: either because it is mineral-like and similar to iron or glass, because it is of plants and similar to hazel or bean, or because it is fluid-like and similar to water and vinegar, or some animal.
And so when it is heard in the ear or some other cause similar to these causes that do not agree with it, and place the ear on the shoulder, and if it still hears, then distil it into water of violet or celery, and administer the extract to the patient, and make him sneeze with condiments, and if he sneezes again, then take some of his spittle and apply it to the ear, and treat it as a remedy. Then put some cloth or wool on the ear, and extend it towards the outer part, for these are causes of fire in the ears.
And if it is not relieved, then administer the extract with the instrument called a gentle subcutaneous injection, which has this form:
If it is relieved with an injection, it is good; otherwise, administer the extract with a small amount of twice-diluted juice.
And if it is not relieved with water, then make a catheter out of metal and insert the end of the catheter into the outer part of the ear and close it with wax and softened oil so that it is not too much, but just enough to relieve the obstruction. Then expel it with a small wind, as ten fingers with water that we have mentioned.
And if it is not relieved in this way, then take a ring of amber or some other object that can be placed on the ear, and put a certain quantity of it on the end of the ring, and place it gently over the ear. Then insert that into the ear with ease, and dry the ear from moisture.
And if it is not relieved with all the causes we have mentioned, then you must take care that the patient does not suffer from blisters or spasms.
And the way to do this is that you must cut off the patient's hair at the beginning of the head with scissors, and extract the blood from it in the second way due to the virtue of the blood, and then apply it to the scalp with a small incision in the middle part, and place it on the scalp with the intention of treating new flesh, just as if you cut off the hair at the roots and made an incision on the forehead. And so the wound of lunar shape goes into the patient's leg, and when the patient is shaken, stop it if you can with an appropriate instrument; and close the wound at that moment quickly, and heal what is within so that it is cured.
And if the cause pierces into the ear, it is one of the grasses that are created and inflated, then administer the cure and extraction; but if you do not obey your ears, then take a thin spike according to this form: and administer that the removal of that grass that is caught in the ear.
And do not pour water when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in drops, and extract it gently with your fingers or with a sharp instrument, or with a piercing blow; for it is eased by extracting it.
But in water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing at the beginning, and fill his ear with a few drops of old vinegar, and rub over that ear in which the water is, and if by this it comes out, it is good; and if not, then take three or four small, sharp, and new needles according to its length, and heat them slightly, and bind those on the fire, and the patient puts one of those into his ear, and jumps over that part with another needle, and pierces through the ear with a second. Then do not stop water in the ear until all the water is discharged.
Then do not stop water in the ear until all the water is discharged. And the water has been discharged, then take paper or a cotton ball. and place one end of it in the ear, and extend the other end to the fire until it is completely burned.
And then take another cotton ball and pour water through it in the ear until all the water is discharged, and insert that with a tube as if it were coming out of the ear.
But in the extraction of animals that enter into that ear, if it is a small thing, then push and extract it with your fingers as mentioned above; but if it is a large thing that causes pain to the head of the patient, then administer the extraction of it with your fingers or with a sharp instrument, and that cause is lighter than all other causes that pierce into the ear.
But in the extraction of a vermen that is born in the ear, when you cure that with water as mentioned above and in the distillation treatise, and do not use your own cure, then look at the ear towards the sun.
And if here there appears any cause of the vermen, then extract it with your fingers or with a sharp instrument; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is slightly curved and wide at the end from which it comes out, whose shape is like this: And insert the thin end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient suffers; and extract it with a strong suction, and make drops of water, so that all the vermen are discharged.
But if you do not obey your ears, then turn it and close it in the circuit of the tube with wax as mentioned above; then administer distillation that has already been distilled the small ones in the cure of vermen, and observe water in the distillation treatise.
And your infusion with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is like this: Make it slightly curved, and at the end of which there is a small hole, and at the top.
And so it is applied to the cavity of the tube where it is necessary. And if you want, take the ray and wrap it in the end of it with care, and pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice of some herb, or water as these medicines in the tube — and that is in the ear — and then insert the ray wrapped with care, and press your hand on it briefly so that the oil goes into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels it.
And the oil that is infused into the ear has already been burned slightly. And be careful that the cause that you will extract from the ear is not too dry, because ear medicines do not tolerate water.
Chapter 7.
Of Cure for Ear Aching.
Some small children are born deaf from their mothers' wombs, and water has already occurred in some adults, it happens in the meat of the ear because of pain or flesh, and that pain sometimes occurs at a distance from the ear.
That which happens in the ear canal, which does not understand the matter, is in difficult conditions of healing.
And in that ear which you understand, be careful to pause the patient's ear towards the sun and look at it. But if there is a small obstruction, open that with a slight spray of the following substance:
If the thin end of it is small in length, of which one part is acute and the other is not; and the spray is made from two sharp lemons so that it does not harm the ear.
But if the aching is caused by hidden flesh in the ear or in its meat, then extract it with sharp needles and apply that with a gentle spray, so that all the flesh be removed.
But if aching is in the ear canal, then take a sharp and slightly curved needle, heat it slightly, and insert that into the ear canal.
But if you feel an obstruction in the ear that the patient suffers easily, then try to press it lightly; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then pause the ear with a thin cloth according to the width of the tube that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and make drops over it for several days so that it is certain that the swelling will subside; or take some and sprinkle it on three-edged slices, and spray it onto it, and if the ear has already been poked, then be careful to break the piece and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in wax that is made with rose oil, so that the pus is soft. And then heal what is inside so that it is cured.
But if there is bleeding due to a disease, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and press it against the ear, and use another cure that you have distilled, which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the distillation treatise.
Chapter 8.
Of Cure for Ear Aching.
Athezel that affects the eyelids of men is sometimes wet, and sometimes dry.
And if you have those with thin hairs or with needles, cut those with a sharp knife, and then pause them over the three-edged places.
But if there is bleeding due to a disease, then cauterize those with a small sharp instrument.
And the best cauterization is to pause those with sharp knives and return them when there is no more cause of their hairs; and when they are cauterized with fire, those hairs are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment for large blisters that appear on the eyelids.
Clouds seen in the eyelids of a patient are sometimes caused by an underlying condition that leads to increased inflammation and hardness, and thus is referred to as "gout".
And it is accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelids below and above.
Then the treatment in this case is that you consider if the swelling is proceeding from within the eye itself, which would be concerning and would cause concern; and the cause of it could be a foreign object.
Then cut along that line with ease from the inside out to remove it, and then suspend it by a thread and cut off that end.
And if the swelling is large, then you should adjust it with stitches; and treat that area so that it can heal.
And if it is small, then you will not suffer any harm from it because the blood of that area will restore it and heal it.
And if the swelling is declining inside the eyelids, which are inside the eye, then cut off the eyelid and suspend the swelling by a thread; otherwise, you may suffer from the incision, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is cut with an incision, there will be no cause for concern.
Then wash the eyelids with saltwater; and treat the area with a poultice so that it can heal.
Chapter 10.
Of the treatment above the eyelid of the eye.
Axection is common in the eyelids of children, causing them to cry and leading to eye discharge; it does not allow them to look clearly at the sun because tears flow from them.
And so they constantly look at each other's faces, and sleep with their eyes open; and the eyebrows on their left and right are moist, which is due to swelling, and the presence of something that may cause damage appears in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel something hard inside.
And there is no way to operate on that person without lifting their head and placing a cloth over it and making incisions in it according to the amount of fluid that contains overall, and then place that under the eye and press it with your fingers while saying "I will" repeatedly so that hard matter is pushed down into half of the circle, and then open it at the bottom where there is moisture, making an incision along its length, not wider than that made in blepharonomy.
However, in the right place, you should make a complete incision so that you reach the hard matter, because at different locations, you reach hard matter through an incision made according to the shape of white grays.
Then remove it with the cloth that you have wrapped between your fingers on either side and turn it over, holding it between your right and left hands so that it is turned inside out before being removed.
And remember not to adjust the incision so that the spike does not reach the eyelid and cause damage.
However, if you do not find hard matter at the beginning of the incision, rather than adjusting the incision, place a cloth dipped in water and wet on it; then remove it and spread the cloth over the area and clean it with powder.
Then put salt on it and place it in the cavity of the incision so that the moisture that remains there is removed.
And then treat that area so that it can heal.
However, if pus appears in the treated area, then treat it with calamine plaster so that it can heal.
Chapter 11.
Of ways to examine the eye.
When the eyelids are natural and have their own hairs, then examine them for any signs of disease, such as excessive tears and moisture on the eyelids and the membrane within, which can cause damage to the eye, referred to as eye burning, and it is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization; or by surgery through an incision and stitches; or with blades according to whether you look directly or indirectly.
Then place the cap of the instrument on the left side; then turn the eyelid of the eye to you with your right hand, and if it turns, do not worry; and if not, insert a needle into it at the bottom of the eyelid, which is — close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs — close to the hairs, and pull the thread through it, and turn that side towards you with your left hand, and bring the thread to the top of the eyelid.
Then cut along that line with a sharp knife, which is inside the eyelid, below the tear duct; then remove the thread and place it between the eyelids, and turn the upper eyelid towards you with your left hand, and bring the thread to the top of the eyelid; then press the lid with your fingers while saying "I will" repeatedly so that the needle is pushed down into half of the circle.
However, in the case of a large amount of fluid on the eyelid, as it differs from person to person, and because the eye is affected differently depending on the amount by which the eyelid is moistened.
Then cut along the line you have drawn, starting from the tear duct, and continue to the bottom where it meets with the other line. And if your incision is close to natural hairs, as it is when there is hair growth, then do not worry about that.
Then place the pointed instrument in one of the corners of the cloth, and carefully scrape it all off; then adjust the two sides of the incision with a sharp knife or a blade, making them slightly curved; wipe away any excess hair from the eyelids with powder; and if you want to make that area clean, do so; otherwise, do not worry about it.
Then leave the stitches in place for three or four days, and then treat that area.
And if you wish, leave the stitches in place for as long as they can be left in place, and then treat that area because the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the stitches and the accumulation of moisture; however, longer-lasting stitches are better. And therefore say: "The ancient way of treating eye burning has been forgotten."
However, when the instrument is placed on the eye, it is a good operation and not dangerous.
And it is another way of treating that, and that is to turn the eyelid towards you in this form, and then raise the lid with three separate and gathered corners according to this shape.
However, if that is not possible, hold the sides of the eyelids, and if they are not closed, then insert a thread into the middle of the figure, and place another thread at the top where there is no hair, and fix those threads with stitches, and then raise the upper eyelid with your left hand using an upward gesture, and bring the lower eyelid towards you with your right hand, and make the same movement.
Then he adjusts the two lips of the wound and sews them together, curing what is inside that should be healed.
If, however, you have an abscess that needs to be lanced or cut open, then do so and apply ointment and poultice, and wet it.
And if the eyelids turn inward, so that the pellets fall out, then you use what I said above about lancing them; but sew them up in cases where it is artificial.
First, cut off the hair from the canes in this way: And if you turn the eyelids and separate their shapes according to what I have described; and then with art, make two thin canes or two thin stiles from them, whose length should be according to the length of the eyelids and their width according to the width of the spine. You have already lanced at the ends of every fracture, where you have the threads.
Then add a little water to each of the canes, which are too thin above the eyelid, and tighten them very tightly, and leave them for a few days, because by their own tension they will break and rot from within.
But if it is delayed, then cut off the eye, and if the wound has healed, then heal what is inside that should be healed.
Then when it is solid, the eyelid is raised and the pellets do not poke.
And this is the way of making two canes according to this form: nor more nor less of either length or width.
Chapter XII.
On the Elevation of the Pellet-Punctures on the Eye with a Needle when the pellet is hard.
When the pellets are unnatural, hard and sharp, then do the operation with a fine needle, and pause in that part which is sub-thin, and carefully attach each to it in a subtle way. And let the length of the threads be of the quantity of a palm.
Then you make another fine thread under that one, and join the ends together if you wish to.
Then place the patient's head in the middle position, and bring it closer to the sun that your work may be known, since it is a subtle and tiny operation.
Then insert the needle into the root of the pellet with care; and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly before it comes out on the other side of the pellet.
Then pull the pellet out from within, and push that one into the lid, and have the pellets be one, two or three; not more.
Then remove your hand from that part where the pellet has been pushed out of its place in the lid, keeping it with the natural pellet on the eyelid.
If it is drawn out of its place in the lid and is not pushed out, then you draw it out of its place on the split ends of the thread which you have used at that part, while keeping it with the natural pellet on the eyelid; but if it is pushed out, then you push it back into its place above.
Then you close it with a knot and tie it, and if any of them come loose after two or three days, then the pellet will adhere to its place again and grow well on that.
If the pellet breaks again, then you adjust a long pellet from the natural pellets, and raise it up; or, if you want to lengthen it, then you raise that part by itself, keeping it with the natural pellets on the eyelid.
Chapter XIII.
On the Cure of a Blot in the Eye that is on the eyelid.
When the eye is blotted, and the eyelid contracts when it closes, or on the right or left part by the bad consolidation of a wart or section or cauterization, and this is called "leporine", and that one is either natural or accidental, and is made by the consolidation of a wart or section or cauterization, or similar to them by mistake.
Then the way to operate on it is that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it; and pause in it the thread which is between those two, and join them together so that they are healed.
Do not use any cure for the eye from those causes that dry it up, for if you do, then it will return to being dry more quickly than if you do not.
Use on the eye from those causes that soften it thus: with fenugrec, and bathe it in water which is warm and salty, or apply aqua-alkaline oil, which will be liquefied by a little of the oils, and dip the cotton swab into it, and apply to it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all that is not consolidated according to the shape that you start with.
And this operation which we have described is nothing other than a correction of a blot in the eye that does not return to its place according to what it started with.
Chapter XIV.
On the Cure of a Blot in the Eye that is on the eyelid.
This cure, which is made on the eyelid, is rightly called an eye-wash; and it is either natural or accidental.
It may be accidental if caused by a wart, section, or cauterization, or similar to them by mistake.
Then the way to operate on it is that you take a needle which makes a double thread, and keep it in the flesh, and let it go through the lacrimal duct from the left, into the lacrimal duct of the right, while the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh on each side with the needle and cut it with the knife, and then sew it up with a wide needle. Then if the eyelid returns to its shape as it should, then do so with a sharp edge; but if not, then hold the blade on the split part of the eyelid, and make the two slits at the bottom of the eyelid.
Then the ends of the two slits should be at different angles to each other, so that when they meet they form one figure; and let them converge towards each other.
And this figure is the Greek letter: Lambda.
Then extend that flesh with the quantity which is the width of the eyelid on each side, so that it fits over the eyelid; and let it rest there.
Then adjust those separated parts together with a woolen thread, and then heal them with water that we have described as being soft, and with the compresses within which should be healed.
If this eye-wash is done through a crack or stitch or cauterization, then you cut it flat on the eyelid pelts according to what comes before. Then separate those compresses between the two lips according to what I have described.
In the sum of the speech of the cure of eye-wash when it is on or off the eyelid, which runs into that operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of the eye-wash; and that form is various.
The artisan knows how to prepare it at all times in any way possible, so that it returns to its natural shape; or as close to it as possible, and the bad one according to what it gives him from the operation and the instruments in the best preparations.
Chapter XV.
On the Adherence of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or the Cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in a young man, so that his eyelid is fixed above the edge of the eye, and movement and its natural works are easily prevented, then if you push the extreme part of the lid upward, or extend it outward with oil.
Then insert the thread subtilely beneath the adhesions, which are not sharp to the incisions, holding it firmly so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and maintain the thread so that the tissue does not break away from its grip.
Then your incision should allow for the removal of those adhesions easily, so that the eyelid may return to its natural form and all the adhesions are healed.
Then place in the patient's hand salt water, which you should wash with; or distill in it the water of zonars dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the flesh with a chisel, and place on the flesh wool infused with oil of almond, then use the third day for causes of consolidation until it is healed.
Chapter .XVI.
On Incisions on the eyelid and prominence of the cartilage of the lacrimal bone.
You know that the cartilage of the eyelid is composed of two kinds of tissue, either nervous or non-nervous; it is similar to hard frost, if it was forced upward, would break away and leave the nerve exposed, but if it were allowed to rise naturally, the cartilage would not stick to the bone.
And both of these tissues do not commence until they are in contact with the lacrimal bone, which gradually advances toward the eye, so that it covers the vision and prevents light and the movement of the tissue.
May the manner of working in this incision is that the patient should hold his head between your knees, and then open the eyelids, and raise the eyelid to your hand, and collect the cartilage with a little double-pointed chisel, and extend it outward at its base. Then take a needle and insert it into that cartilage with hair of horse or cow or milk, or something similar, or double the point of the needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the cartilage, and pierce that with the needle, and tie the thread to the cartilage; then extend that to its base, and cut off the tip of the needle, and remove that from the eye, and cut off the hair that is sticking out of the eye. Then follow it with the thread attached to that within the last part of it.
Then insert the thread into the root of the lacrimal bone with a small needle or scissors, and allow the cartilage to break away naturally without causing continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the cartilage is extended on solid ground or on fidel, thus: having done so, then remove it with a chisel-like instrument whose form is like this:
Keep in mind that you should not touch the corneal membrane with the chisel and allow it to break through, and that the pupil is pierced.
Then your incision should leave a little salt in the flesh or the blood will not clot there, and let that remain within for three days, and then treat it with water to heal it.
If the cartilage is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle into it or attach it to the bone with thread, then treat this special kind of cartilage with medicines, and heal it in this way by eye and recommend it in the division.
And if you want to incise that cartilage, then open the patient' s jaw and place a chisel pointed on one side according to this form: with subtlety. And if that cartilage is rarefied and hardened and inserted into the root, then distill from it in the flesh with oil or salt water, and wrap the flesh for three days.
Then repeat the operation on that part until all the fluid is drained from it, or otherwise the opposite will happen, which means that you should allow it to bleed, for if you do not, then at first the blister will heal; but then treat it with water to heal it.
Then repeat your operation on that part with reason until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal cartilage, if it is causing great damage to the flesh, should be suspended with thread; then incise that part from one side, and do not complete the incision so that you do not incise the continuous flow of tears.
Then distill on the lacrimal bone with oil or salt water until it is healed.
Chapter .XVII.
On Incisions of the ear and water that is born from meat.
Some of the flesh in the ears is born from meat, and it is over-laid within the eye, or approaches or extends over the eyelids, and it joins to the bridge of the nose with rope of balusters.
May the operation on it is that the patient should hold his head between your knees, and then open the ears, and collect all that meat with a chisel convenient to the water, and then wash it with one forceps or basket; and then incise that meat at first until it is finished with the incision, and be careful of the flesh that you do not cut away any part of it from your operation.
Then your incision should be made in the same way that we have described in the incision of the cartilage of the ear, or with a small chisel or scissors according to the form that will come:
Then, when your incision is completed and all that meat is drained, then fill the ear with salt water, or distill into it powder that tastes like medicine and is corrosive, and place on the flesh within the eye until it is secured from blistering.
And if there is any cause of algordenici and it is hard to be treated with cautery, and you fear blistering, then leave the flesh and heal that blister with water, and then repeat your operation on that part until it is healed, and simulate in the meat that occurs in the flesh of this kind.
However, you should remember that you do not remove any cure from the jaw by natural or accidental means; then use iron, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Chapter  XVIII.
On Collection of Knowledge in the Flesh.
The veins that are hard on the flesh and prevent its operation, and which dry up over a period of days:
Then it is necessary at first that you consider whether the flesh in which the knowledge is hard is strong and does not cause any harm other than the knowledge, then collect that knowledge.
And it is that you command the patient to hold his head between your knees, and then suspend those veins with thread or double-pointed chisel according to your prudence; and that the thread be of subtle doubled threads according to this form:
or two threads of subtle length, gradually increasing in one side according to this form:
Then those veins should be collected with sutures made of subtle thread, and you should abstain from using a needle every half hour, until the veins are completely drained from the flesh and are dried up.
And guard that you not cut the veins at the extremities of the limb; and if your operation is before the sun, and be sure firm in your operation so that you do not wound except those veins.
And when you have finished, then do so that the green wine or ale is poured into which is freshly made to run with the juice of the apple.
If you can not collect all that hour, then do so that it is applied until the water that eases the pain of him, and leave him for a few days until the pain of him is eased and that he is assured of the apoplexy by cauterizing.
Then repeat on him the second time that way as soon as possible so that he be healed.
This is the shape of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
Of reducing the arachnids to the nose.
When you heal arachnids by burning or sharp medicine according to the narration of him and is not healed, then do not engage on him but cut off the apoplexy as soon as possible and that you draw out all the moisture from it which is in it and the powder within that is.
And so when the bone is exposed and rotten or black in it, then do so with an instrument which this is the shape:
It is called a sharp cap, and is made of iron, and the cap is round so that it may be fitted on with a point made by grinding or cutting finely (so that it is in this shape).
And pause that on the corrupt place of the bone, and move that between the thorns carefully, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is smooth.
And water be made some strips, and restore the place with dry and sharp causes.
Then if the place is solid and it is good meat hidden from the sun and separated from the sinew by cutting the flesh, and if it does not renew itself and does not become apoplexy and does not happen to him an accident, then do you know that he is healed.
And otherwise, then do not engage on him but reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this way: and it is that you discover second bone with sharp iron or acute medicine, and after revealing the bone, then do so according to this shape:
The end of the iron triangle, and the handle of it be first weakened at the end as soon as possible.
Then pause that on the bone, and that be near to the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little of the flesh, and move your hand towards the tribe little by little until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient's pain as it goes into the nose, and that does not feel any pain in his hand.
Then restore that place with dry medicine as soon as possible.
Then when the meat does not endure the place, then the matter which is spilled at the joints returns to the nose, and so water be poured on him.
Chapter XX.
Of reducing the prominence of the flesh.
When the flesh eminents completely and does not happen to him an accident or a decrease, then do so that you relax the larynx, and move that, and move that, and make the wind blow in the throat for good suck; and move that on the flesh, oil it which is made of acatra and aloe and essences and sarccola, and tighten the plaster over the flesh with a little dust.
And the way of the dust is that you take sheets of leather, and each sheet be double in four pieces; and make of those sheets.
Then move those on each other according to the quantity which the flesh needs. Then tighten those on each other with a hard and strict strap; and move the wind back for sucking and scarifying; and move those winds and leave the flesh straited day and night.
If so, then do so that he does not become stiff.
Then move the larynx day and night as soon as possible.
And if the flesh has already been reduced, then it is good, and otherwise, then do so that the plaster is with the dust and stricture and wind back as soon as possible until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
Of the incision of the prominence of the membranous membrane.
When that disturbance is in the membranous membrane, and do so that it eminents and cuts it outside with a little razor, and is figured out the shape of man by water, and want to cut, then do the operation on him as soon as possible, that you put the blade into the roots of the eyelids on either side of the larynx, and move that blade into another one which has double thread at the end of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and leave the first blade according to its disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and take away with it the membrane in the circuit of the blade, and tighten that.
Then move the blade and pause on the flesh, which is made of infused wool in album of milk, and leave that until it hardens.
Then heal the flesh with water that comforts him as soon as possible so that the plague be healed.
In some parts of the whole body, a circle of cloth is fitted onto the flesh which has a large eminence, and be pierced with a sharp needle that enters the larynx of the flesh, and run off the humidity of the albuginean, and lower the flesh and enter so quickly.
Then tighten it so that it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of treatment of the eyes.
This malady called alconatus is not but a disease which is adjusted to the flesh as if it were falling water, and that is not.
The way of working in it is that you make the larynx fall on the palate which is raised and placed on the two parts, and move that within so that you see the disease coming at the joints, and that does not fall, and that does not come to pass, and that is dried up, and leave the light, and the patient sees the causes.
And if it does not come down in the lower part, then do you know that it is water.
If so, then prepare the descent of the disease with water which we have said, then do so that the larynx falls between your hands and move a sharp needle into it on top of the panniculus touching a little in the continuance of the conjunctiva to the corneal membrane in the crown (in the place where), so that it be dried up.
Then when it is dried up, then do so that the water is poured on the flesh which you have mixed with honey or water in which you have already built fennel and honey.
Then be cured with other causes as soon as possible until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the treatment of the water that comes down from the flesh.
We have said the spices of the water in the division and which convenes to pierce with the needle declaring, then do so according to health.
Then do so that you make the larynx fall between your hands on a cushion and lie down the patient' s side, keeping it tight.
Then move that near to the eyelids of the patient' s side, if the water is on the left side of the body; or near to the right side of the body, if the water is on the right side.
And place your right hand on the patient's forehead if their liver is left-sided; or place your left hand on the patient's forehead if their liver is right-sided.
And place the edge of the finger close to the brow by the thickness of the rays in the album of the liver from part of the lower tear, and then apply the finger with a turn and a grip on it.
Then pierce into the liver and feel that the finger has already reached due to the sensation of pain.
And note that the measurement of the path of the finger to the edge is the same as the measurement of the space from the pupil up to the end of the blackness, and it is the brow of the liver; for you will see with that pupil the vision of the liver due to the clarity of the cornea.
Then place the finger in the spot where the water is, and then throw it down a little way; if the water sinks a lot, then do so with the patient facing upwards, and then place the liver into the hole from which the water has fallen.
Then wait a little bit; if the water sinks further, then do so with the patient facing upwards, and then place the finger in another spot before the water has fallen.
Then when it is dry and does not sink further, then extract the finger with ease, and turn it slightly by little at a time, and place it outside the liver; and dissolve a small amount of clear salt of gems in water and wash the liver inside with that, and then put the stop or thread infused with red oil and album of liver and bind it to the water of the liver.
May these things not be from our time, and place on it a triple portion of oil.
And if you do not obey to your finger in the instrument of the liver for its hardness — for it is some of men whose liver is hard in shape, — then when you have picked up the spatula which is called albirida with this form:
And then pierce that junction with the spatula, and do not stop your hand in the trunk, and it is not if you do not make a way through the liver's hole.
Then place the finger into the liver as we have said.
And you should pay the compliment of your work, be prepared for the patient' sleeping quietly in a dark room, and be forbidden from all activity.
Then place on the patient' head at its top part so that it is smooth in nature, and do not touch his hair to the left or right.
And be the member according to its disposition within the third day.
Then remove it from that dark room and examine the vision closely, and then return the member within a day.vii.
And do not say that you make water in the hour of the cure or at any time, but rather give an infusion. While waiting, remove water because the water will stick to it from above with great effort and in a violent way of vision.
May this happen if an emetic is not produced, then when you remove the liver before the seventh day, and then return it to water that will produce an emetic.
Then you should wait for the vision of him, and place it over his mouth part where he can receive the water from below for a few days, that it is present in the dark room.
Then be grateful for the dark room and talk about its causes.
And you know that in a dish of oil is not forgiven for some visions, and then be patient with the operation.
Then it has come to us from some of those which are of the Artichoke, and some said that it pierces into the Airach liver, and sucks up water.
But perhaps you do not find in our land the water which has been perfected, nor does it make water run from some of the ancient herbs; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of spices of medicine to place on those who do not know those:
They are made from iron or lead itself, and the extremes of their edges are sharp in this triangular form, that way it is.
Chapter XXIII.
Of the cure of meat, nothing in the nose.
When various meats are hidden in the nose, which is caused by some illness that gathers a scorpion's shape of small bones, or a polyp, and this bad taste is called a polypus because it is similar to that bone's shape represented. And of the meat of cancer, the palate, with black color; and of it is the meat of a lion not of a color.
Then in those which are not fraudulent or cancerous, place the patient' head between his legs and put it under the sun, and open the nostrils of him, and cut up the tender meat. Then remove it from the sides forwardly, and then slice up that meat with a sharp spatula, so as to know that all the meat has been cut; and if there is any left for some reason that can be removed by slicing, then place it in one of the subtle instruments within which you can easily do so. May this happen if an emetic or an acid is produced, then place the water which you have held back; or if it is a malicious emetic, then cut up and cauterize that within which has been removed completely, and all of the holes are filled.
Then place in the nose close to the incision of the sharp edge and water or salt. May this happen if the nose is open and it causes moisture within the palate, then you will know that it has already been healed.
May this happen if the moisture does not penetrate further according to what has happened; then you will know that within it is meat, nothing in the upper nostrils from which there has been no removal.
Then place the finger firmly within him who is of some thickness, and taste it with the nuts, and pause between each nut the amount of this or that, and cut up the patient' head forwardly to the sun or to another cause by which it is possible.
And then the water will make some sound, that it reaches to the nostrils' passages and exits into his throat, and is exhausted upon his back, because of this action does a child at school; and it is a suitable cause for him who wants to do so.
Then place the two extremities of the finger, one that comes out above the nose and the other which is turned inside the nose, and then administer the salt with nuts that are in the finger; and water within that you will know that the meat has already reached to the nuts of the finger.
Then remove the finger from the nose and place on the nose a small amount of salt, and water for three days or more within which it is turning to the taste of meat.
Then end of the cause, place in the nose a tube of lead for many days within which it is healed.
May you know about this cure, use that.
And this is the form of the instrument to cut up or grind substances into oil and medicine in the nose:
And water from silver or lead itself, which is like a small torch that is lit up, thus with a small hammer, and the meat that resembles it.
And if you wish, make a tube closed with cane and the tube of the instrument to cut up is flat and open; and hold it in your hand where this finger is when you pour oil or water that you want from the juices and of the causes which are suitable.
Chapter .XXV.
And put them in the extremities of the nose.
The small warts are not to be put in the extremities of the nose; they are great and red, and they cause a sore in the next day or two.
And by the water that you dissolve them at the beginning of their appearance, and inherit all of them. Then place your hand or a cauldron or burning medicine on the spot where he is standing.
May it not be late for its injection before it is great, consider it if it is hard, of dark color and poor feeling, then do not touch that one because of the great evil that it has caused in him; for small warts do not inject such an apoplexy.
And if the apoplexy is due to a touch of a lion and it is not of dark color, and once the injection can be made in all of them, then empty the patient and inject those warts with caution, and cure the spot with water that it purges and clears within.
Chapter  .XXVI.
Of the suture of the nose, and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is broken by plague or by symptoms.
Know that when there happens to be a solution of continuity in one of these cartilage, it very rarely comes about in that operation except in some men.
Then, when there happens to be some cause of those in him, consider it if it is fresh plague and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with suture, and then cure that within that it heals.
And if the lips that are solved from the continuity are already separated, and each one is healed separately, then consider that you extract a part of the nail of the ear, within that it does not cause plague. Then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and sprinkle on them dragon's blood and powder of three parts, and place over the powder a piece of plaster of Paris, or of some other of the hardening plasters, and leave it to lie for two days or three, then remove that plaster and replace it with another piece, and leave that to lie for a few days, and then cure that within that it heals.
May the way of the suture be that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as it has been described in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread also.
Chapter   .XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips at the insides.
The small warts are to be injected in the inside of their lips, some of them are due to the hardness of the teeth and some of them are caused by the grinding of them; they are little and some are big.
Then consider that you convert those lips and divide each of those hardenings into three parts, then the extraction fill up the place with dragon' blood within that the plague is dried up, then wash it with viagra vinegar and cure the spot with water that is stinging, within that it heals.
Chapter  .XXVIII.
Of the injection of the flesh that is adapted to the gums.
Great care of small needles over the flesh that is adapted to the gums, which little ones cause pain; then consider that you suspend those in a piece of yarn or hold them in your hand and inject that into it, and let the plague run out or the plague be dried up.
Then place over the spot stinging or any other dry powder.
And if that flesh returns, then inject it again, and burn it because the cautery will not return.
Chapter   .XXIX.
Of teeth that cause pain.
When on the surface of the teeth that are divided inside and those in the foramen and between the gums are adapted, some are rough and some are made yellow or green within that the gum comes out by water; and then consider that you extract the teeth that are loose.
And then consider that you extract the root between the two teeth and place the cap of the tooth in the hole, and extract those teeth in which appear those roughnesses and causes of sand; within that they do not cause pain to any other tooth, and then consider that you remove the black color and the green color and the other from them.
Then if that water is in those of the beginning of the root, then it is good; and if not, then extract the root from those to another day and again and again until it comes out in the last statement that you want.
Know that the teeth require different kinds of tools and shapes for your operation. And for this reason the root from which the tooth is divided inside is different from the root from which it is cut between the teeth according to other shapes; and these forms of roots are always prepared that you will see soon:
Chapter    .XXX.
Of extraction of the teeth.
Then consider that you cure the tooth of its pain completely and then begin to extract it completely because there is no reason that can substitute the root when it is extracted, for it is a substance that subsists within.
May it be forced to extract that tooth, and firmly consider that you know which is the painful tooth, for the pain of the root causes the pain in the tooth, and if it is in a healthy tooth, then extract that and leave the pain not cease until the root is removed, because we have seen this by operation of the barbers.
Then consider that you scarify the circuit of the tooth with the spatum in which there is any virtue, within that it dissolves the tooth from the gum at the beginning, and then extract it with tiny pliers or scissors little by little until that is broken completely.
Then place the tooth between two pliers or a strong weapon, and pull it with good speech or with loud noise, and then extract the other tooth in a way that you do not break it completely, and do not give pain to any of them.
And if it is not a foramen, then take one of those instruments, and put that on the other side with ease and force the extraction in such a way that it is made at the beginning.
May it be broken or corroded, then consider that you wrap the thread around that tooth and tighten it by the end of a tiny needle within that it does not break in the hour of your contraction over that with pliers.
Then consider that you scarify completely the circuit of the whole gum and keep your strength so as not to break it and damage that tooth, and return to the root for the evil that is less than the first pain of it.
Then consider that you do not give water to those bad barbers in their last reckoning and audacity on the extraction of theirs; for it is better than the teeth come out, and the roots of them are broken completely, or some of them are extracted with tiny pliers, or extract that with little osses from the mandible as has been demonstrated.
And now to wash the patient's mouth, take a sponge wet with salt water or vinegar.
And if there is a flow of pus in the wound, then also put some dried blood in it, sprinkle it with urine, and if it does not dry up, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and tweezers is important, the former long, thin, with a smooth handle, and the latter thick, with a short grip, so that they do not bend when operating.
And be there like this, with thick handles at first, so that they are not bent when you use them for the first time, and short tips.
And they are made of iron from India, with long tips, and in the tips there are teeth that interlock and tighten strongly, and some have a pointed tip like a crow's beak, which is sharp, and their grip is strong.
Chapter .31.
On the Eradication of Teeth and the Extraction of Bones from the Mandibles that are Cracked.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken or fractured, then wait until the area around it softens; and if the place remains hard for a day or two, then insert tweezers or tweezers-like objects with a pointed tip into the space between the teeth, as if they were the beak of a crow, or a glove, the shape of the forceps:
And their tips are made like files or chisels.
And if you do not obey them by using these forceps or tweezers, then wait until the root is exposed and cut off with a small chisel, whose shape is like this:
And it has a thick tip at the end, and it is not bent so that it does not break.
Therefore, if the root is hollowed out, it is good; otherwise, help yourself to these other instruments, whose shapes are as follows: the first instrument has a triangular tip at the end, and some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a small point at the end.
And you are helped by these instruments, having two ramp-like shapes, whose shape is like this: And for other instruments that will be useful in shaving teeth; indeed, it is made with this instrument which is shaped like an onion: and this is its shape:
Of the triangular tip that is curved or short, and it has some thickness, and it is not bent so that it does not break.
And you should know that the dental instruments are similar to other instruments.
The wise and skilled craftsmen, in their art, invent new things for themselves according to the needs of this operation and the diverse evils; for they do not say or pause at the instruments proper to them, because of the various shapes of various spices.
If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is fractured, then it should be carefully treated in its place by means of the instruments and tweezers that we have mentioned for the extraction of root teeth, and help yourself with the gestures whose shape is like this:
And be of some small thickness, and be pressed or tied to the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is hollowed out; and then restore the place with suitable medicines according to this.
If there is a small fracture in the bone, then saw that piece from that fracture and its blackness, and cure it within so that it is healed.
Chapter.32.
On the Treatment of برجسته Teeth compared to other teeth.
When the teeth are برجسته from their natural position due to their shape, and more so in the case of women, and most especially in the case of elderly women; then consider this: if one tooth is apart from another, and it is not possible to join them with a thread or a wire, then extract that tooth; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument, whose shape is like this: it resembles the head of a pig, and is made of iron from India with an acute tip.
And it is your incision with which you cut off that tooth in three days because of the hardness of the tooth, and not to hurt any other teeth.
And if a tooth is برجسته and needs to be trimmed with a file, then trim it with a file made of iron from India, whose shape is like this:
And it is all of iron from India and the point is sharp; and it has small points like files that are made with it, so that the tooth is trimmed little by little in three days' time with ease, so that no other tooth gets hurt and cracks. And then tie off that end, and cut it off with a razor blade.
And if one of your teeth has a broken part and the tongue is affected, then wait until the bitterness of that piece is overcome and covered, so that the tongue does not taste or speak corruptly.
Chapter.33.
On the Restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver.
When a tooth has suffered from concussion and removal due to impact or striking, and the root has not been removed by the medicine that is stifling, and your treatment does not work, then replace it with gold wire and not silver, because silver turns green and needs more time to heal, but gold does not change color.
And let the gold be of such fineness and thickness as to fit between the teeth; and the shape of the wire is that you take half of it between two sound teeth, and then double it between two molars, or if there are more than two, so that the thread reaches the sound tooth on the other side. And then repeat this process for each part of the broken tooth, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not strong.
And be your strength with which you strengthen the wire so that the roots of the teeth are not lost.
And then cut off the excess of the wire with tweezers or forceps, and add it to any place, and hide it between a sound tooth and a molar, so that it does not hurt the tongue. And then let that wire rest in its place.
If it has slipped or broken, then strengthen it with another wire at the same time as the first one.
This is the shape of teeth and the form of the insertion of two sound teeth and two damaged ones, such as these:
And when one tooth or two returns to its place, and they are put back in their places, and remain attached:
This is not done by any but wise and skilled craftsmen.
Some are apt for some causes of the bones of cows, and is made in their shape like a tooth, and is placed in its place in which it fails the tooth, and is strengthened in this way as we have said, and remain attached to it for a long time.
Chapter.34.
On the Incision of the Thread that is seen in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This thread, which is seen leaving the tongue in some places or is natural to it, or happens by accident due to a wound that has already healed.
And the operation on him is that workers open the mouth of the patient, the head existing in the small body; and they raise their tongue, and approach to inscribe that nervous ligament according to the latitude within which the tongue comes out of its recency.
Maybe if there is any hard or sharp thing, and that is standing for consolidation of the plague, then you pour oil and cut that according to the latitude within which you have not cut the ligament and the nodule is dissolved.
And guard that there is no fracture on the front of the flesh, and that you cut here the air and bring forth flow of blood.
And approach to wash the trace of the incision, whether it is dry or wet or dried up; and approach to pause there the tongue smooth; if such is the medicine that has the patient's tongue in any way so that it is not consolidated or infected again.
Maybe if there is flow of blood, pause above the site of the wound; maybe if the blood is flowing, then do cauterize that place with a hot iron, which is appropriate to be applied to water. And approach that cure with the other causes within which it is healed.
Chapter.
Of extraction of the hernia, pause there the tongue.
Some wounds occur on the tongue, it is similar to a small hernia, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and it is strong that is amplified within which it fills the mouth.
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient in front of the sun and consider the hernia.
And if you turn it from brown or black, hard, where the patient does not feel the pain, then do not touch that which is sharp.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you pour oil on him, and cut that with a sharp knife, and cut all of it; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you pause above, wet, with a hot iron, within which it is dried up.
And return to your work within which you have not treated it with respect, within which it is washed with a wet and salt; and cure that with the other cure with water within which it is healed.
Chapter.
Of extraction of the hernia of two ears and of that which is nothing in the mouth, and of the other hernias.
When it is discovered in the mouth, it is a gland that has become inflamed, which occurs sometimes and is called two ears, which, when you treat them with oil that we have mentioned in the division, and they are not healed, then consider if the hernia is hard, of brown color, of little feeling, then do not touch that which is sharp.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that which is sharp because of the flow of blood; before leaving it, let it be dried up, and if you cannot take it out, then cut it off from yourself.
And if it is of white color, weak, and the root is thin, then that is which can be cut.
And the operation on him is that you consider, in front of your own operation, if it has already rested or decreased; and then make him sit in front of the sun, and his head is in the small body, and open his mouth, and the servants take between their legs his tongue, holding it away from the instrument with a noble tool which this is the form:
It is made of silver or copper, and it is sharp with an edge.
Then you press onto it with that tongue and show it to him the hernia, and put oil on it, and fix it in the place; then pull it apart from the outside as much as you can. Another with oil that draws aside any cause of the tunics, and approach to cut that with the instrument which this is the form:
Another with oil that draws aside any cause of the tunics, and approach to cut that with the instrument which this is the form: It is assembled with pliers, but the extremities of it are sharp, so that the orifice of each one of them is in the edge of the other, sharp, which is made of iron, polished.
Maybe if that instrument is not with you, then cut it with a sharp knife which this is the form of it: It is sharpened on one side, not sharpened on the other.
And then when you have cut one side, cut the other according to this way of cutting, and approach to cut the patient with oil of the kind that is used for cleaning.
Maybe if there is flow of blood, guard that water of decoction of green garlic or of mulberry leaves is added to it; and approach to cure that within which the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure that within which it is healed.
And some wounds occur in the mouth with other hernias than the two ears, and cut those according to what I have said in the cutting of two grooves together.
And I have already cured a woman of the hernia which was born in her mouth; that hernia was of brown color, of little feeling, and she had already closed her mouth, and she breathed very directly, and she had forbidden her to eat or drink water, and she was close to death if it were not stopped.
And the hernia had already been so much that it had caused two rashes within which it passes through two paths.
Then I cut it open and examined it, and I took that one, and threw it far away from me, and approached the other one, and I held his tongue, and I closed it in that hernia.
And then I cut off a big piece of him, and there was no blood from him except a little blood. Then absolutely I closed his mouth on him, and soon he drank water, and then I did not stop to cut that hernia little by little, and that hernia was in place of the other one, which cuts within which it is prolonged;
Then I went forward and cauterized his mouth, then I walked around and did not know that God was with me.
Chapter.
Of cutting of the hernia when it is inflamed.
When it is inflamed and the hernia is long, then that one is called a hernia; and if it is thick and round at its roots, then that one is called a buba.
Maybe when it is cured with oil that we have mentioned in the division, and you do not cure it with your own cure, and this hernia has already stopped bleeding; and if it is long, and blood comes out of it, of brown color or black, and does not feel like it is a hundred times, then do not cut that which is added to it roundly; and if it is at the roots of it, then you call it buba.
And when you see that which is described in the second way of its whiteness and length, then you should not cut that which is sharp; and if it is at its roots, then call it buba; and when you see a new one that has been added to it roundly, then do not cut that which is long; and if it is in the roots of it, then cut that which is on the outside of it with those instruments which are described for cutting two grooves together.
Then do not cut that which is sharp unless it fits on the term of nature's addition; for if you cut him more, then he will make his own speech.
And close up the incision, use that which we have described in the incision of two nails, and cure that within which is healed.
Mays if the patient was scared by the incision of his hand, then cover that with an instrument that is made for cauterization, and close up the incision with the tip of the instrument. And if the patient's hand is in pain, place a pointed instrument on it to relieve the pain.
Then place the medicine's convexity in which the medicine was placed over the patient' foot, and let the instrument rest on the patient' tongue; and make the patient sit on his side so that saliva or mucus does not go into his mouth from the medicine within, so that it will not come out of his throat by any means from the medicine within.
Then bring your hand close to the medicine, and squeeze it onto the patient' tongue; and let that medicine remain on the patient' tongue for an hour before it loses its freshness and becomes bitter from the medicine' taste.
And if you want to, take a string and wrap it around that end of the finger, then dip the string into the medicine, and insert the finger with the string wrapped around it into a tube; so that the string sticks to the tube, and make that string come out as much as you need for the cauterization of the uvula, and let that string dry up and fall off after three or four days.
And if you want to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and do the cauterization of the uvula with the string wrapped around it at the back of the throat, and rinse it with water; then wash it with oil, and apply ointment on it; and let it be cleaned from within so that it is healed.
This kind of treatment is safer than surgery and less scary than fear.
Some remedies for treating the uvula are more effective than surgery and less scary than fear. For example, you can cure the uvula with water that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is healed with smoke treatment in this way: prepare a mixture of herbs such as calament, hyssop, oregano, ruda, scicimara arabica, chamomile, bread, and others similar to them; add them to boiling water, and let them boil; then strain the mixture, and put it on a cotton wool ball; heat the cotton wool gently, and place it over the uvula's opening; then use an sharp instrument according to this way; make it of silver or of iron.
And insert the end into the patient' mouth so that the steam reaches the uvula over the opening; then the uvula will become dim.
Then repeat over that dim spots until they are dry, and remember not to perform this treatment before the appearance of abscesses, because it would fit too well on the abscess; and do not make water, but rather declare the abscess of the cautery.
If you do not have that instrument with you, then take a cane and make it into the end a cap of a bottle; so that the patient' mouth is closed, because the bottle's cap prevents steam from burning the patient' mouth.
This treatment is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of removal of thorns and of water that adheres to the throat and of other causes.
Dim spots adhering to the throat or a thorn or any other cause.
Then extract water that appears from it, and let the sight see it clearly, because you press your tongue against the instrument in front of someone; so that it is declared to you which water is in the throat.
And water that does not appear to you in the throat, then make the patient vomit before the food is digested in his stomach, because it removes the cause of the sore throat through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of nap or a bite of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge that is dried up and wet it well with water, and put it against the patient' throat; then make the patient drink it, because when it reaches the place where there are thorns and is extracted, then make the patient vomit. Then take a snake and put it on the throat well, and let it be extracted; or take a pig's ear and put it in water; then let it sit for an hour and extract it.
If you do not manage to vomit with the methods I have described, then use an iron instrument according to this form:
It should be thicker than a finger and in the end of it should be concaved which you insert into the patient' throat with ease.
And raise the patient' head up; and make sure that your touch of his throat does not hurt him, because it will provoke coughing or make the thorn stick in his throat, or he will swallow his food; so that you extract what is causing the sore throat.
But if the patient inserts it into himself, then he is honey for his knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and pulls it down; and make him press his hand against the instrument in front of him, according to the quantity that has been prepared so that he vomits.
Chapter.xxxix.
Of removal of bloody phlegm attached to the throat.
When blood is extracted with water that I have described in the division of treatment with medicines and do not taste it, consider first the patient' throat to the right; because you have moved your tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
Then if you find blood, extract it with a small spoon or a delicate gesture gently.
And if you cannot extract it with that, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient' throat; then place an ignition instrument in the tube's opening; and make as much water pass through (since the blood has stopped flowing and stopped sticking to the throat) and abstain from drinking water all day.
Then take a bowl full of water and work the patient' mouth with it, and wash the mouth with that water; and do not drink any more water from that water for an hour or another with his hand; because blood is sensed when drinking water.
If blood is not vomited with the water that I have described, then make the patient smoke himself with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument that I have described in the uvula' smoking treatment.
Make water, and do it quickly.
It is another way of operating by smoking that water; you take a wave in which are carbon ignitions and the wave is covered with a blanket over its middle, and make an opening in that wave; then place the instrument' end in that opening; then remove the smoke; then make the patient put his mouth on the tube' opening; then close up the patient' mouth so that the smoke does not escape; and let it be smoked; and let the patient' mouth remain closed so that the smoke is not vomited until you know that the smoke has reached the blood; because the blood will stop flowing and sticking to the throat when it feels the smoke.
And if it does not work, then repeat the treatment several times, and abstain the patient from drinking; and eat salty foods and dry fruits, and do not drink water, and let that be repeated as necessary so that it is vomited.
And this is the shape of the instrument that it has to be used with blood from the jaw when it is seen; and it is like forceps as well some times but since it has some curvature: That one has to be used with blood from the jaw when it is seen; and its tip resembles a swan's beak, which is sharp, in which case, when there is some cause, that does not leave.
Chapter .xl.
In which is the essence of the speech in preparation for the emesis and section of them.
The emesis are specific motas, in various ways, depending on whether they remind you or not, from each of these in this book.
And they are diverse in their piercing and section for two ways, one of which is by the specific emesis in themselves; and by what concerns the humors.
And the second way is by the places where it happens in the body, since the emesis that occurs in the head is another from that which occurs in the buttocks; and the emesis that occurs in the flesh is another from that which occurs at the joints; and each of these has its treatment through operation.
And more emesis are some that do not need to be pierced but rather a proper maturation of the disease in them or completion of their course.
And other emesis are some that need to be broken when they cross, and do not mature according to their course, such as emesis that occur near joints, since an emesis that occurs at a joint prolongs the duration within which it can corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing pain in that member; or is an emesis next to a main member, and if you do not pierce it until it has not reached its full maturity towards the main member; or is near the rear, then pierce it without reaching its full maturity; and do not need to break what does not complete its course of digestion, but rather what is near the rear, so as not to damage its root and be elongated towards the anus, causing a fistula, or that it occurs in the term of it that it does not heal. And also that you know the time to pierce the emesis, and so it is when it has reached its maturity.
And you should know that it has reached its maturity when the pain reduces and the fever subsides, and because there is a decrease in pulse, and an improvement in the appearance of the head of the emesis, and other signs.
And since you know that piercing will occur at the place farthest from the emesis, and the pus comes out of the cure of eminence.
And the piercing should be done at the length of the flesh or the body, if the emesis are in the joints of the limbs or the feet, and in places where there are ligaments, nerves, and arteries; and finally, in all places that are enclosed within the limbs, since it is not reflected; for those that are reflected, use piercing according to the member.
And when the emesis is in a flesh place, then it is better that you delay the piercing of it until its course has been completed, since what we have said; indeed, if you pierce it ahead of time, it prolongs the length of its path and adds to its bitterness, and makes its depth severe.
And a few other emesis should be pierced according to the depth of the flesh or the body, depending on necessity or the member's need.
And if you administer a small piercing, and in the large emesis a large piercing and wide or various sections according to the diversity of their sizes.
And others are emesis in which the case needs to be broken and cut when it occurs as such, so that it does not reach its full course until then; and that happens when there is a disease in the muscles or joints.
And of those that are not cut in half at the section have three angles; and of those is the one in which it is cut like a sheet of oak, and of the emesis of the joints.
And of them are those in which round or lunar section is administered, and similar to those.
And that one whose emesis are superficial lions, know that you pierce it with a superficial piercing or flat piercing only.
And when the emesis is large and has already collected some bad blood, then pierce it and do not cauterize that which is extracted at that time; take out a little bit of it, and on another day take out a larger bit, and on a third day extract a little more, and so make it small pieces.
And if the person with gout is of virile virtue, or female child, or small child, or old in decrepitude, since the animal spirit moves its vessels to expel the bad blood, and makes it strong to die; and you close their doors.
Keep this chapter carefully guarded, and when you pierce these emesis, know that you avoid the plagues; and consider whether the plague of the emesis is small, or a flat section, then administer water to it with a syringe or cup; and if the emesis is large, and the holes made by piercing are small, then know that you should pause your hand in any place where both enter together.
And if in the emesis is cut off a part of the cord or is concaved in the circuit, then know that you should compress it with old or thread or fabric, and if you have burned it or shaved it, wet it; and strengthen that one by the third day; and proceed to wash what needs to be washed within, so that it is healed; and treat the bad blood that is in it, within the way that it is cured.
And if you experience a flow of blood during the operation, then administer rubbing water with vinegar and cloth; and place that one on the surface of the flow of blood.
And if the flow of blood persists, then know that you administer the recommended medicine and powders in various places from this book and division.
And if it is in wintertime, and the place of the emesis is a place of joints, then know that you should administer powder of wine or oil with cauterization, and pause those on the surfaces.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then know that you should pause powdered wine or oil with cauterization, and all of it be washed within so that it reaches its third day; and since we have said, and then know that you cut the emesis and avoid it; and administer it to the cure of water that is appropriate for it to be healed.
And so is the water that is necessary to know the cure of emesis universally; and more according to the way of distinction, which I have already said, each emesis in a particular way, is the way to treat it by chapters alone.
Chapter .xli.
Of the section of emesis that comes in the tail of the head.
In the tail of the head are small emesis, and they are of various kinds that contain tunics that are their own nature; and their kinds are different.
And of them are fakes, and those that contain humidity resembling lemon juice. And of those is the humidity resembling milk, similar to its nature; and of those are the hard ones.
And in all sections, and in the extraction of any, there is no fear when you have removed what causes it; and you should not make fire painful.
And the operation in section of those is that you to these with instrument the form of which we appropriate so, which is called within-the-bone, within that you know that it contains.
And if that water is wet, then cut them with section according to length by superficial section according to this form:
And start in the section of line .B to within line .G. Then, when the moisture is discharged, then scrape that area that the moisture contained, and do not miss any cause of all, for ten times examined returns, if remains of that cause.
And dip the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; then fill that wound and leave it within another day, for with water it corrodes all that remains of that film.
And repeat over that wound the Egyptian ointment second time and third time if it is necessary of you, within that you trust that there was not any remaining cause of that film; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if pus is present with grease, then you cut them according to this form: on a section having form of a nut, and put nails between two lips of the section and cut it from all sides, and squeeze your virtue in extracting the tunic that contains that.
But if your fire causes inconvenience, then do not reheat it immediately.
And seemingly do in the pus of section and cure according to that you have said; and cut over the pus if it is light, for it is of little blood and little moisture.
And some times so much of the pus that is in the head in some men from which there is no moisture at all; this cause is because you cut over one pus on the head of an old woman and cut over the pus with a deaf, sharp, white, which cannot be split, and if to someone it is applied, it will hurt him.
But in other pustules on the head this is not this chapter, as those that come to the heads of children and their roots of ears, but section of these all is superficial section.
And pause the piercing of those from the lower part pus because it is relieved to the body with the lower part pustules.
Then return to cure those with water that suits them.
Chapter LII.
On Section of scrofulas which happens in the neck.
The pus on the throat and on the shoulders, and some times they happen in other parts of the body.
And those that happen in the throat, and those that are generated among them, and all the scrofulas of those are destroyed their own tunic, and so, with pustules and pus on the head, have repeated.
The spices of these scrofulas are pus, because some of them are blisters, and some contain moisture, and all are evil that do not respond to cure.
Then in that which you have said of good disposition in the Treatment, in which the color of water that is shown is like to the color of the raisin, and it is pleasant from all parts, and it does not join to the nerves of the neck or veins, and it does not feel full, then cut them with superficial section of the lower part pus to the lower part of the body of the line G., within the line B., and scrape that from all sides, and squeeze it between two lips of the raisin with onces, or many ones if you have need of those, as we have said in the pustules on the head.
And it is more careful not to be cut the vein or nerves.
And let the stick not be wet, which is not suitable to your hand with the incision or that quiets the patient, and do not cut water that it is not necessary to cut; for if you cut a vein or a artery, then prevent you of your operation, then pause in the wound tri-saline or other powders that stop the flow of blood, then leave the wound, and let the acuteness of the pustule be relieved, and let the wound become soft and start to rot. When the blood is cut.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then ask the doctor's advice if there is any cause of other small scrofulas, so cut those and clean those.
And if it is in the root of the scrofula of a great vein, then you must not cut that scrofula from its root. Before going forward, let him lie there with a folded towel and let him rest until he does not feel any pain.
Then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then heal it.
And if you cut that scrofula all at once, then you must join the two lips of the wound and sew it with two stitches so much pus as there is no unnecessary waste.
But if you see that there is any waste because of the size of the scrofula, then cut its root and remove it, and then administer the stitches and water that is said.
And those scrofulas that contain moisture, then cut them with superficial piercing here the place appears to you the site of maturity of that, and pause the piercing of those that it is the pus at the bottom of the body, as we have said.
Then return to pierce them, with oil and similar to those, so that it corrodes the water that is remaining of the corruption. Then, when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then heal it with oil generated within, until it is healed.
Chapter LIIII.
On Section of the pustule that happens accidentally in the throat.
They said that this section is suitable for the epidemic, and did not see any person in our land who had it done.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men they have squint, so that the extraction of the epidemic is avoided, as by water it is not done well for all veins and many of the patient's body are here.
But in those that have pustules in the mouth or throat, or two ears, when the malignancy is not in the cane, then run away from the section of epidemic to avoid the loss that it is done by piercing.
Then when you want water, let us write the epiloid with three circles of the epiloid, or four to a small section for its length between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in the middle, not in cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh, and the doctor' tools of blood are quickly.
Then if the medicine is a little bit, then cut the raisin of the throat with onces, and then cut the raisin within that it reaches to the tube, but avoid the doctor' tools of blood if there is any cause of them.
Then return to the section of the tube as we have said; and is indicated on the section of the tube with a flame that is made from it, and by the absence of wind.
And let the poultice remain open for some time.
Then when the hour comes to pierce through the cartilage, add two pieces of string from the poultice, and cut one off short.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh swell up so that it may heal.
And Al-Buqasaid that the top of the sentence which we have narrated is only to see if any of these knots has already opened the throat of the patient, and the patient's windpipe has been cut, and some are about to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the spot where the poultice is, for a little while, and is saved from death.
And by water I command that the poultice remains open until the evil of the gout is consumed; and this evil lasts for three days; then afterwards I command that the poultice be done in this way, and that it be healed until it is healed.
And that which I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant held a knife and cut through the throat of the patient and I was called for to heal him, and I heard the sound of his last breath, and I found the poultice and removed the cloth covering it, and I saw blood coming out.
Then you confessed that she had not cut a vein or an artery, and the wind came out from the poultice, and I healed her until she was healed.
And did not happen to the servant except that he had pain in his throat, and after a few days he returned to his normal state of health.
And now let me tell you that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
Chapter xliv.
Of the section on a knot that occurs in the throat before, and it is called a hernia of the throat.
This knot named a hernia of the throat is a large knot according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
It has two ways, either it is natural or it is accidental.
And in the natural one does not heal.
And the accidental one has two ways: one looks like grass knots, and the other looks like a knot that is caused by an artery's constriction, and in that there is fear. And do not say that it is wrong to put metal on it unless it is small. And if you find it resembling a grass knot, and it is not suspended to any of the veins, then cut it with a pointed knife, and extract it with water that comes out of it; and if not, then examine all his body, and if you find anything suspicious, then heal the area with water that is used for healing, until it is healed.
Chapter xliv.
Of the section on knots of the throat.
The knots have many kinds and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
And do not hesitate to ask me about the difference between a knot and an inflammation with heat, when you are in doubt.
Then you say that it is hot and feverish and has severe pain, and when the heat of the superfluity is eliminated; and it is completed by decay which ends the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Maybe a knot is not hot or has fever or pain, but it contains something sharp that cuts the flesh, and it is attached to itself with a string.
And it has two colors according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a swelling and it is made like this with water, and its kind is many, either grass-like or containing liquid, and the colors of the liquid are different, as I have said in the division.
Then when you approach the healing of a knot, examine it with an instrument that is called an incision, according to its form in the next chapter which is coming.
And it is the way to investigate knots and all kinds of nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place that seems wet to you in the knot, and you turn the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has already entered the skin.
Then finish your incision according to the measure of the size of the knot, and remove the instrument from within it, and consider whether it is already healed in its trace.
And if the liquid current has dried up, whatever its color is, then you cut it on a shallow section as I said in other knots.
And if there is no moisture in the trace of the incision, then you will know that it is grass.
And dry on top with an irregular shape according to this form: As I have taught you, then hang it upside down with nails, and cut the skin from all sides easily, and keep the hair or fur, if there is any, on top of the knot; and remove that skin from the knot.
Maybe if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that skin, and many things can cause it to rupture; then you will extract it with scissors within it so that it does not rupture for any reason.
For if it is too much or too little, the knot returns according to the kind.
And if you think that a small part of it has ruptured, then completely apply some sharp corrosive powder to the area, and place it over that which is causing the knot, and heal it with another type of healing until it is healed.
And if it is a large knot, then you cut its two sides with a sharp knife and heal it with water that goes into it.
Maybe if the pulse is weak or not weak, then you cut and clean the area of the wound that was made by it, and leave it open to air for three days until it heals; and then return to cut what remains of the knot.
Chapter xlvii.
Of the shapes of the necessary instruments in section and piercing.
The shapes of the incisions are three kinds: some are large, others are medium, and the smallest are ones.
The large incision shape is like this:
The small incision shape is like this:
If the instrument is made of iron, or it is sharp and smooth, and if the edges are properly curved, so that the instrument enters the knots easily.
And these are called simple shapes, and one of them is called a bird.
The three kinds are: some are large, others are medium, and the smallest.
The large shape of experience is like this:
The medium-sized shape of experience is like this:
The small shape of experience is like this:
It is agreed that they are knots, and inflammations, and fistulas, and abscesses, so that some of them are on the bones, and others are causes.
And they are round, large, and sharp needles that are sewn with threads of wool, and they are made of citrus, or iron, or silver, or gold; and the most common ones are made of iron.
And the black plums are shapes that are made by the opening of the fistula in the cavity in which they are reflected, and that are reflected above their level.
The three shapes are: some are long, and others are medium, and the smallest ones, according to the measure of the width of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Shape of the great experiment in lead
Shape of the medium experiment in lead:
Shape of the small experiment in lead:
The shapes of the numbers are of a special kind, for those are called simples, to which there is only one curve, and they are of three kinds: great, few, and small.
And these have five sides and three points, and they are of three kinds: pointed, flat, and round.
And those have two curves, and they are of three kinds: double-pointed, single-pointed, and rounded.
And these have three curves, and they are of three kinds: triple-pointed, double-pointed, and single-pointed.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of the simple few number, form of an oval:
Shape of the great number with two curves: Shape of the small number with two curves: Shape of the few number with two curves:
Shape of the great number with three curves:
Shape of the small number with three curves:
And these are the shapes of the scalpels, with which one cuts and scrapes the knots and pustules; and they are of three kinds: great, small, and few.
Shape of the great scythe:
Shape of the small scythe:
Shape of the few scythes:
The extremities of those with which the section is sharp are acute, and the other extremities are not-acute, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather that it be made in an instant in the Excoriation of the knots, the fear of incising a vein or nerve, and so that by this means the scythe is saned, and also tranquilized somewhat by the adustio - which thus obtains in the excorjication of the pustule.
And these are the shapes of the bullets, and they are of three kinds: great, small, and few; thus also with them.
When it is made from wax and seems like a ray, and when it is made with alcohol.
And in the extreme right-angled point there are punctures and also in that part which is hidden within and without; when you wish, thus with them.
And the shapes of the spatulums, which are made between the teeth; thus also with them, that is, piercing the pustules and not perceiving the bad tastes, they are of three kinds: great, small, and few. And these are the shapes:
The forms of windows, with which one cuts off the flow of blood; and they are of three kinds: great, small, and few. The shapes of triangles:
When it is made from wax-citrus, round in some length, and subtle.
And these of the kinds of windows should be great, small, and few; so that, by these being cut off the flow of blood with speed in need, and when to you first, it is not medicine.
However, you do not use these to cut off blood in all parts of the body, but only in the flesh parts; indeed, in the folds of the legs and thighs, in the armpits, and in the navel, and also in the folds of breasts, belly, and underarms, resembling the flesh.
And some vessels are made of these other instruments: small-looking scissors, according to this shape; and so the blood is cut off when it is made by a flood-cut or an incison of a vein or artery.
And some vessels are made round according to this shape:
Chapter 47.
Of the care of men's breasts, which are assembled from women's breasts.
Some vessels are inflated breasts of men that are made from the breasts of women by means of a cloth; and some vessels are inflated breasts, and also assembled breasts of women, and Roman breast-pumps, large.
And if you wish to cut off those with a lunar section according to this shape, from the line B within the line G, and so excoriate the whole filthiness; and so apply the plague of medicine that is incarnated, and so join together the two lips of the wound with sutures, and heal that which needs to be healed.
And if the breast declines to the left and is softened by its size, then cut it into two pieces above, and join them together below, resembling the lunar shape; so that each one is contained within the other, until such time as the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line from B and the line from G. And so excoriate the scald, which is between the two lips of the wound, and so prevent the pus; and give him medicine that has been made from the suture, and also from the powder that is necessary for the treatment within that it be healed.
And if you do not like the cutting of that which covers the wound with the fear of the bad condition, and for the flow of blood; then cut off what it is that covers it with a corrosive bath, and so heal that which it is that is corroded, which is Roman in the greasiness, and so heal that which needs to be healed.
Chapter 48.
Of the piercing of pustules that come from the left side of the line.
These pustules that come from the left side of the line are of the kinds of scrofulas and pains, which contain a pus.
And some of those that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are cut off according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all is drained, what it is covered with water in the pustule of the sick person, then cut off the coto completely, and so heal that which needs to be healed on another day.
And so the coto is left and is healed with a convenient bath in water; until such time as it be healed.
And if the pustule of the knots is, and of the scrofulas; then cut them off above that which is covered with a cloth in the section about the scrofulas separately.
And if the plague is spread out in a way that it causes pox, then administer to it according to what has been said before.
Chapter 49.
Of the piercing of pustules that happen through an artery or a vein.
When an artery is broken, and the codena is consolidated that is over it, then cut off those pustules with a sharp tool according to this figure: from the line B to the line G. And so the veins are cut off, and the blood is heated; for when a pustule happens through an artery, it is a long-aggregated pulse in the preon of the body; and when it is made by an incison of a vein, you feel a stridor.
And that which happens through a vein is round in its course.
And the section over this pustule is an error, and most of all in that which are on the sides, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and also in the folds of the body; and it is very large, so that its cure with fire be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the top, be avoided.
May so as those who are of them by the swelling of the orifice of the artery, cut in the cord in the long; and approach the section with nails and approach the artery, and free of tunics until it is uncovered.
Then place a needle on it and let it penetrate the other one, and string the artery with two knots,-- which causes you to feel an attack of pain in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then put the spot where it is between two ligaments with a needle so that it burns all of it while it is in there, and let the abscess be dissolved.
Then administer a cure that is generated with dung within so that the ligaments fall; and heal it with hot water within so that it heals.
And if it is an abscess through the section of a vein, then cover what you have with your hand so that it is in your possible reach of the abscess with the cord, and insert the needle from the spot where you have held it with your hand, and let it penetrate; and be a double thread within so that you extract one from the other side, and ligate the abscess with one ligament according to what I said to you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
May so as you fear to extract the thread, then insert the double thread from all the abscess according to the first incision of the needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its place within so that when it is wet with water that is in it, then cut off the surplus of the cord, and let it be wet where it lies.
Then place over it the pillow that you have submerged in water and oil, and administer the cure that is done with hot water within so that it heals.
Capitol for the abscess that occurs through turning of nerves.
Thus happen abscess in the artery and vein, and somewhat like them when they happen in their percussion or from superfluous work, and by analogy.
And it is done in the places of the assistants or of the head, or in any place where joints are moved.
And it is a difficult abscess, and somewhat like the color of the other body, and in the larger ones are disposed to their sides, and when it is hot with violence, you feel in the patient's legs a sort of stupor.
And it is not an abscess in the front of the body, and for this reason the cord is left, and it is moved all over, neither in front nor behind.
So then those that are at the joints do not cover what is in them with iron, for it would be difficult because it will resist.
May so as that is on the head or in the forehead with a needle. May so as it is an abscess of little size, then cut off what is in its root.
And if it is great, then cut off the excess with an inch, and remove what is in it, and stop up that; and patch the wound with suture, and heal it within so that it heals.
Capitol.
Of an abscess cut through the mouth, and somewhat towards the belly.
And it is a good thing to avoid for those who have blisters on their bellies and on the other parts of their bodies, as they are similar to mushrooms from which the root is thin and the head of them is thick; and the lips of these are not closed, and these are small.
And I have seen one, and in its belly there were two pieces that seemed like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, with small roots.
And the lips of these were turned backwards, and moisture ran from them all the time.
So you cut off those and split them in half in the center, cutting eighteen teeth. and the other one as six teeth.
And the operation of their incision is that you consider if the patient' body is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, with thin roots; then cut off the latter at half-width, and are in your presence cauterize with fire, for what is seen from the cut should be expelled with a bit of blood; and if you blow on it, cauterize it.
And if the patient is a little bit nervous and afraid, be careful of incision with iron; but then take an iron from fresh lead, and tighten it on that part of the skin, in the way that has been said before; and let that remain for two days.
And then tighten it on the string of lead; so, do not tighten too much that it is torn from its side, and let it be cut and broken by itself with work.
May so as that is of thick roots, then in its incision there is no cause for fear and worry, and more so in that which is in the belly.
May so as that you could cut off what is most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then heal that within so that the wound heals.
And be careful not to cut off what is of a dark-colored skin, of little feeling, with a slight gaze, because that is cancerous.
And I came to the remembrance of something like old age.
Capitol.
Of cure for the eminence of the navel.
The eminence of the navel is caused by various things; or by fissures of the navel that is over the belly, and gives way to it with its thread or buddle according to what it has in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery according to what is before it, or by constriction of wind in it.
May so as it is by a fissure of the navel and by tearing of the thread, then the color of the abscess is like the color of the body; and it is sharp pain, and there are various positions of it. May so as it is by the loss of the buddle, then the position of that with water that we have mentioned, and of various violence, and when you press it with your fingers, it returns; and there is a great movement towards it, and it is magnified by several deves of the inner part, and violent work.
May so as it is by humidity, then it is sharp and does not hide when you press with your hand, and is neither constricted nor broken.
May so as it is by blood, then those signs indicate that the abscess is turning black.
May so as it is by meat, then it is a hard, thick, and durable abscess, and it remains in a certain quantity.
May so as it is by constriction of wind, then the touch of that is sharp.
And the operation of that is that you consider if the eminence of the navel is by blood flowing from an artery or vein, or by constriction of wind; then cover what you have with your hand, because in it there is fear and worry as I taught you in the chapter in which I said about abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
And if the eminence of the navel is by the buddle or thread, then order the servant to hold the ale with his right hand, and be standing; and put a needle from all the navel in the circuit, and order him to move it slowly around the navel on the right side of the ale, and move it around to the left with slow motion; and extend the double thread of the abscess to the sides in the circuit of the navel over the place where you have put it in front of the attempt; then cut off a bit from all the navel at half-width, and order him to hold the fire or the iron strongly in the way that is pleasant.
And so tear the middle of the apostema, spread it over the ligament and insert this small stick in that direction and try to bring out the intestine; and if you can't reach it because of the ligament, then remove it with great effort and push the intestine into the innermost part of the abdomen.
And if you have torn the membrane, then grab a sharp tool; and cut away its excess.
Or if it is against your arceria or vein, then turn around that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them firmly into those two threads and force the two needles through; and then tighten the apostema over the needles in four places.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the place heal on its own until it is healed; or cut it when it is thin and then clean it out, and then take care of that wound that covers the intestine inside so that it heals.
And if the eminence of the navel is not meat or because of humidity, then cover what you have opened up so that it heals as well as possible and removes the humidity or meat, which you have cut off, and then take care of that wound that covers the intestine and consolidates that place.
Chapter 32.
On the Treatment of Bone Fractures.
We have said, in the division, of the types of fractures and how they are treated with medicine, and that it is dangerous in their treatment not to ulcerate them; and we have said that these fractures are generated in the greatest and most careful way of treating them.
And they said that some small fractures are in places where it is possible to remove them all, such as those in the nipples or thighs, and especially when they are starting out small.
But when it is old and big, don't cover it because the eye cannot heal such a wound nor has I ever seen anything come out of it, or that it has come into water.
And the operation in it is that you go ahead and let the patient rest and take some black cholera remedies from time to time, and then heal it if there is a clear regurgitation.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in which that place is located, and then cut off their nails with a sharp tool and then clean them thoroughly from all sides to ensure that there is no cause of their nails to cause any problem. And let the blood flow, and don't stop that bleeding, and squeeze the places, and wash the blood thoroughly with your hand or with the instrument you have at hand.
But if you feel a contradiction in the flow of thick blood when cutting a vein or an artery, then cauterize it so that the blood flow stops, and then take care of that other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 33.
On the Treatment of Dropery.
We have already mentioned, in the division, of the types of dropery with water, and the signs of each type, on how to treat them with medicine.
And that which is cured by iron is only the species of Althias alone, and it does not approach the species of Timpani or the species of Hyparch, because water is fatal.
And when you have already treated this species of dropery with medicine and do not understand your own treatment, then consider that if the patient has already been cured or if it is a different kind of disease from what we are treating here, namely, if it is a cough or a stomach ailment similar to this, then remember not to treat it with iron, because there is a fear about it.
But if you find the patient to be very helpful, and there is no other disease in him but only dropery, and not old or young, then the way of operating on him is that you raise him between your hands, and the assistant presses his belly from below with his hand, and then you make a cut in this way:
be of two sharp edges long, with one sharp edge at the end, and then cut little by little so that during the operation you do not go into the intestine, and let it hang.
And then consider that if the generation of dropery is from part of the intestine, because it is said that you have cut three fingers away from the navel on the right side over the penis.
But if the generation of dropery is from disease in the mother's womb, then your section should be to the left of the navel for three fingers.
And if the generation is by self-abuse, then your section should be on the right side.
And don''t cover that your section is on the rib from which you want to operate on the patient so that the excess fluid does not flow into that place.
And then pierce the instrument thoroughly, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand with the spadge between the blade and the syringe, and then pour out that amount; and if it is a little more or less than an ounce.
And then pierce the syringe so that the spadge reaches the desired place, and this is a place of water. And then remove it and insert an instrument which has such a shape: It is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or ivory, and in its base there is a small hole, and in its sides three holes: two from one side and one from the other; and its end should be sharp according to the feather shape, as if:
And at the end of it, there is an armilla, because when the instrument goes into the water, then it returns to the instrument immediately, and evacuates half the amount of water in one minute, for if you evacuate that quantity from it except for what is necessary so that your own spirit or soul leaves its body by resolving itself, or death comes upon it.
But evacuate that second amount of the virtue of his breath and of the goodness of it, and let this mean to you the dispositions of the patient regarding the virtue of his pulse and its goodness.
And then remove the instrument, and hold back that water which causes the amount to be retained by the rib from which you want to operate on the patient so that it is held back by the blade that is above the syringe, and let this mean to you how much time the patient should spend in bed.
And then repeat the instrument another day if the patient has endured water, and evacuate a small amount of water, and let it flow for several days out of fear that it might come from the water, and remember to make an error not to draw water but only a little bit.
But if you are afraid of the patient, then let a large quantity of water flow, and bury it in sand, and make a soothing bath, and wait for a long time; and take care of that with drying medicines so that it heals.
And then cauterize above the stomach, and the mother is the cause of the generation of water, as we have said before in this treatise.
Chapter 5.
On the Treatment of Children Who Have Blisters on the Urinary Passages.
Some children are born with blisters on the bladder's passage in their mother's womb, and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is straight or not in its place).
Then place him on his back so that his legs hang down, while keeping his hands above his head.
Then place a small plumb-colored nail on the joint, and tie it there; and for three days or for 30.000.000.000.
And when he wants to urinate, let him stand up and urinate; and then bring him back again.
And if you do not place the nail, it is possible that the urine which goes over the area does not allow this closure.
This nail from which the joint has been cut is made of lead; thus, as I have said, for three days or more it must be increased.
These nails where the joint has been cut are not placed in their place, and this causes it because from these, the one who is born and cuts it is the end of the cap of the foot; so that he can not urinate on the inside, until he raises the foot to his head; and it is not a generation, for this reason the seed cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a bad disease.
And the way of performing it on him is that the patient is placed on his back, and his head is extended over your left hand with great force; and cut off the top of the foot from the place of the penis with a sharp knife, or so that you do not scratch any part, in order that the blood of him may run down to the top of the foot and that the joint falls into its place according to what has been cut.
And you must be careful in your operation of the blood, since it may happen that this causes it to run; and wait until the blood has stopped flowing, and heal the wound while it is still open.
Chapter LVI.
About the inflammation that occurs in the penis and the scrotum, and about corruption, blackness, and the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
These things that are seen in the penis and the scrotum are called gangrenes and they cause blackness; and there is an indurated swelling of the flesh.
And of these there is one which is malignant and another which is not malignant.
Not-malignant, if you suspend it with a small medicine and cut it off completely; then dip it in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it with the ointment every day until it is healed.
And if inflammation is malignant, of a pale color; then, if you want to treat it with cauterization and cutting, follow these instructions:
If the inflammation is in the foreskin of the head of the penis, and one part of the inflammation is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should hold that which is inside until it is solid; and then treat that which is outside, since when you treat that which is all together, you cannot be sure that it will not become torn.
And if corruption and blackness occur in the genitals and foreskin, then you should cut off completely that which has already become corrupted and is beginning to rot or has already rotted; and then dip it in flour made from milking the cow's teats, and mixed with three times as much salt and crushed herbs.
And then treat that other one with another treatment until it is healed.
If there is blood flowing from the penis, then administer lunar cauterization according to this method:
Since cauterization is beneficial for both the flow of blood and the corruption that has occurred.
And if the head of the penis is completely destroyed in an instant, then place a plumb pipe into the foreskin through which the patient can urinate.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that which has the foreskin, and it is not required to cut off all the foreskin; and when adhesion occurs by corruption or swelling) then scrape with a blunt knife until it dissolves the ligament and frees the head of the penis completely.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then cut off the top of the head of the penis and the foreskin with a sharp knife; and then, because the foreskin, when it is thin, pierces it slightly by its thinness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a sharp knife; that which is very thin will be easily separated, since it will slip into the water; but take care not to cut yourself.
And then treat it with a violet poultice until it has hardened.
Chapter LVII.
About the cleaning of children and the treatment of water that occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence; on the other hand, it is useful in some cases, and it must be done with great care, especially because it concerns children; and if it is possible to do without this operation and to avoid such loss by means of another easier way, then that is better for salvation.
I say that the children of free people should not be circumcised, since they do not have it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by trial, which has caused many crafters and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a needle and a scalpel; and they use a ligament made of sheepskin and cut with a scissor.
I have seen all of these ways, and I find that purification with scissors is better than purification with a needle and a scalpel; because the knife causes pain, and it will force another cutting if it is not done carefully. And in purification which is done by shaving, and it is a manual operation, the use of razors is not secure in cutting off the end of the male member; because it will go into the hole made by the razor.
On the other hand, in the operation with a needle and scalpel, there is a great risk of causing corruption to your own body. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature; and I have seen that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
More about purification which is done with scissors and a ligament than by experiment: because the sharpness of the blade that goes over it is like that of one that is sharp; and so if you press your hand in proportion to two sharpnesses, then cut according to a comparison at a time; and make a compression of the ligament into a figure which contains the skin of the foot completely, with which there is no mistake.
And the way of performing this first operation is that you should place the child face down if he is small; and let the ligament be laid on its penis completely only, and then release it the next day.
And then put joy on him in all this way which is possible for you; so that he may receive his intelligence. And then place him among your servants who are prepared to work; and do not let the child see those or anyone else.
And then put your hand on the foot of him and blow in the foreskin; and pull it off until it is cut completely; and then purify him with water.
The form of the shears for dismemberment, this is the form:
If the extremities are not cut, and the others are, so that the claw is not left hanging, and the length of the two hooks is the same as the length of two hands clasped together.
There is an error in dismemberment because so much force is needed to pull out the internal chain entirely, or a part of it, you have to cut it.
So then when you stretch out that hand in front of the place where the incision is going to be made, and cut it with a second one at the same length.
And if you cannot hold it in your hand, then take it by the fingers and cut it.
But if they have passed three days, and then leave the poleax to go flat, then you leave it there so that the incision is cured with ease, and cut the second one quickly, and cut it the second time as soon as it is ready.
And keep the head of the poleax away from him, because it will not be suitable for him.
And then he cures that with water which solidifies the powder that we have described in the treatise on powder.
And if the chain has been cut at more than a hand's length, and you follow the cuts from above, then it will not be suitable for him.
But he cures that with water which we have said is to be used until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxxxv.
Of the cure for retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by wind or cold, or a hot diet, or meat, and similar things to those that we have said concerning the methods of cure in the division on urinary diseases.
But if the urine is not dissolved with water which we have said is violent, then when the patient drinks it through an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and fine steel, with a tube of thin cane-like material similar to a palm in shape and half its length, and the cane-like tip.
And the method of introducing urine into the syringe is that you bend the funnel and put it in place with good hold; and then you insert the extremities of the funnel into the opening of the syringe, and cut them off with scissors if there is any excess from the end of the tube, and then insert it into the bladder with force.
Then turn him onto his back, and put the bladder of him over his hip, and insert a poleax into it with oil of olive and aromatics.
Then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the head of the poleax; and then turn the poleax upside down at the other end of the insertion tube; and then force the inserter into that; and then force it into the bladder, so that no voiding takes place, but that it is kept in until it becomes full.
Then slowly extend the funnel with the small end, because urine causes the bladder to contract.
Then pour out that urine for the cure, and use a syringe, unless you wish to continue treating with water and using a syringe until the bladder is emptied and the bladder is relieved of its contents entirely.
Chapter .lxx.
Of the quality of bladder-irritation with warm water and similar instruments to those which agree with it concerning water.
When there is an ulceration or blister in the bladder, or a hot wound in it, and you want to distil water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clam-caldron, which is made as follows:
but at the end of it is sound, so it is closed. And in that there are three holes: two from one end, and then four times.
In the beginning it is clear water, which it is suitable to drink; and then according to the quantity that it is drawn from it, so much is added as is drawn from it, so that when any cause is removed from it, the water is drawn with it, and when it is expelled, it is expelled with water, and when it is expelled far away, according to the quality of the clam-caldron which is applied to it, in which is cast naphtha in the battles at sea.
Then when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clam-caldron into the moisture, and throw it with that water which is forced into the hole, because the moisture is thrown into the cavity of the clam-caldron.
Then insert the other end of the clam-caldron according to what we have described in the syringe; and then force moisture with that water which forces it, because that moisture is forced into the bladder with the same force as that water is forced into the syringe; and then pour out the contents of the bladder entirely.
The form of the fine caldron to which the bladder is to be applied, so that it is dried, is as follows:
It should be made of silver or lead, the end being covered with a fine cloth; and then it is to be used in this way:
Then turn the bladder and put that moisture which you want to dry in it; then place it between two strong clasps on a funnel; and heat that moisture over fire.
Then insert the end of the caldron into the poleax.
Then hold your hand over the bladder with that moisture which you want to dry in it, and make it spread over the surface of the bladder until the moisture is completely dried.
But if you do not have a bladder, then you take a large string and make it into a circle; and then pierce it throughout its entire circumference; and then insert the funnel with force into those openings, turning them around as they go in; and then add the ring as you go along, so that you are holding the contents within it, unless you wish to pour out the liquid which you want to use, and then wash and add water.
Then you hold that instrument in place and make it perform what I have said concerning the bladder, and then allow that moisture to pass into the bladder through the instrument.
Chapter .lxx.
Of urination.
We have already said concerning the urinary diseases and the cure of them with medicine, and the difference between urine formed in the lungs and urine formed in the bladder, and the characteristics of each.
We have said concerning the urination with which it co-operates, and sectioning it off.
And the pain generated in the bladder itself is that which is fixed in the bladder.
And I am now narrating that manifest exposition and abbreviation.
And I say that the pain generated in the bladder is primarily seen in children; and it is from the kidneys of man that the urine, which is ejected from the bladder, seems like water in its thinness, and appears in that sediment; and the horse rubs its tail, and motes appear on it, and is dressed up; and if there is a pain in the forehead, it means a fever.
And it is easier for children to recover from that disease which they have had for twelve years, and difficult for the old. But in young people it is half-cured by water because it is among those.
And from that which has greater pain and slower recovery; and if it is little, then it is the opposite to that.
And so we come to the cure of that disease, let us begin with that which is mentioned in the horse's rectum; for that fissure, some veils prohibit the introduction of the disease by means of it.
And then let the horse be laid on its side and put in a certain position with its knees up so that the pain goes down to the front of the bladder, or jumps from place to place, or some veils.
And then make a cut between the two legs, and the intestines are separated from them, so that the entire bladder is turned downward towards their feet.
And then prepare it, and all of it is outside.
So if you feel the pain in the space, then lie down at once on your side with a cut made to one side of you.
And if you don't completely remove the horse's treatment, then lie down so that you rub it with oil on the back of the left side; if it is a child, or the middle-aged one, and enter it in its rear end. And prepare for the pain to come out from that place which was behind you. And turn that little horse around gradually towards the front of the bladder.
And then press on it with your hand, and expel it from one side to the other through the space in which you made the cut.
And order the minister to press on the bladder with his right hand; and order another minister, with his left hand, to extend the genitals towards the sides from behind, and from the place where you cut them off, towards their sides.
Then enter the spatula slowly and without hurting it; this is the way of doing it: And then cut it in half with the spatula between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, moving back from the left side of the anus; and make a transverse section on that pain, so that the section is wide outside and narrow inside according to the quantity which I have mentioned for the pain, not more, because if you cut deeply into the anus with the spatula, the pain will be increased by the stabbing.
And you should know that there is no limit to the amount of pain for which it is difficult to make an incision with water.
And that water is like a lion's roar, and it is round, and its incision is very deep.
Then if it is that which has no limits, adjust in the split.
And if it is not like that, then lie down on it, or support it gently, so that the extreme of it is like that with a sharp edge, and do not remove it from you; or enter it from behind with a sharp instrument.
But if you cannot lie down on it, then make a small incision in it, and if you see the flow of blood, cut it with vinegar three times.
But if the pain is greater than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the front of the bladder, and then cut it over it; and then push a little water over it; and apparently, if there are more than two motes, make an incision.
And if the pain is very great, then ignore that you cut it with a large incision, because this happens to the horse in two causes: or it is old, or it is drinking continous urine; for its place is not completely solid.
But give him an exit from within that which is outside, or enter it with the forceps within it in order to extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with balm of aloe and honey, and strengthen it with dragon's blood; and support it. And then place on the horse a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rose-oil and water, so that the swelling will go down quickly.
And then raise up the horse on its side for three days.
And when that horse has been unbound, then clean the wound with water and soap, and then treat it with a mixture of salicyl acid and an antiseptic solution within three days.
But if the wound becomes infected and swollen, and of that pain is in the bladder frozen, and because it causes the urine to be prevented (and this is known by the exit of the pain into the urine), then enter the horse' pain with your hand; for if it remains in the body, it corrupts the bladder and causes putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with rose-water, water, and salt; and in opposition to everything, with water which is suited to the cure of that pain within it.
And then, for all the hours of the day, apply those medications which you have prepared and adjusted over the wound.
And if the pain is small and is in the middle of the horse' back, and it is fixed there, and the urine is prevented, then treat that with water which I have mentioned before surgery, because twenty veils are opposed to that treatment; and I have already mentioned it and I will repeat it:
of a sharp triangle-shaped edge, sharp, fixed on wood.
And then put it firmly on the horse' back, and pull it away from the wound so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then enter the tool into the horse' back, piercing with ease through that which is the most suitable for the piercing tool to pass through that pain. And then turn the tool around in that little pain with your hand, and you will pierce the piercing of it within which you are making that small hole, because the urine is immediately discharged.
And then press your hand on that which is round the pain, which is in front of the horse' back, because that is curved; and it is difficult to get out with water, and the horse is cured.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you for some reason which prevents you from doing that, then pull away from the wound, and then put it towards the wound. And then cut on that pain in the middle of the horse' back between two bonds. And then remove it. And then unbind the wound and clean the pain, which is in the wound.
And it is not necessary to unbind the wound from the pain, but to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other unbinding from above, because when you unbind the pain with your hand, the cord returns to its place and causes a swelling in the wound.
And so it is necessary for you to tie the bowstring behind him, that you raise the loop behind his back, or that you return the bow to its place, and collect the arrow there with a hook as well.
Chapter .lxi.
On the extraction of stones from the bladder.
Stones in the bladder are sometimes generated.
If there is a stone in any of those, then it is difficult to cure it, and is forbidden by the treatment with many manual operations.
One of them is that the bladder is very heavy.
And the second is that you do not find a clean bladder that can be inserted into the mouth when it is cast, or of those who have married.
The third is that you do not have wise women to perform this operation, mainly the incision part.
And the fourth is that the place of the section on the bladder is far from the place of the stone, so that you do not risk a section above the stone, and in that there is fear.
But if necessity compels you to water, then it is necessary for you to take a clean bladder, and one that is not old.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek out one who is quick and subtle, or present a woman married in the art of the bladder, or a woman who has made an incision in the art.
Therefore let her be presented, and order her to do whatever you send her, from the examination of the stone to the beginning; which is that she should look if the bladder is empty, then, if it does not come out with a push, she should put it in her mouth and want to pass the stone.
Therefore, if she is captured, take her away from her husband, and then order her to cut into the bladder.
But if she is not empty, then order the wife to put her husband's seed in the cavity of the bladder and cut into it, since she should place her left hand on the bladder, and press with a hook.
Therefore, if she is captured, it is necessary that, with great care, she be taken out of the bladder's orifice, at the same time as her virtue is taken out with a hook, through which she reaches to the root of the cushion.
And then cut into it above the place where the bladder is attached to the root of the cushion from which it comes out and insert the tip of the hook into that part so that the stone is removed with it, and do not remove the seed from him with a pull.
And the section should be little at first; and then put the hook on the section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know that the stone is pulled out with it.
And you should know that stones in the bladder are small: because some of them are few and large, and sharp and long, and have edges.
Therefore you know how many species there are of water that you mean when you speak about it.
And if you want to stop the flow of blood, adjust in the virulent place and cut it for an hour until it is stopped, and then return to your operation before the stone is passed.
And prepare for yourself from the instruments that are described in the extraction of stones from men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
And if you want to stop the flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the bladder's orifice, then you pause with dust on that place and tighten it with a ring, and do not repeat water; and leave the bladder alone, for a strong man will die if he expels it. Then heal the arrow.
Therefore when the sharpness of the pain has passed, it can be cut, then you return to your operation before the stone is passed.
Chapter lxii.
On the section on hernia.
Hernia is a certain accumulation of moisture in the white part, which leaves the loop of the genitals containing the water, and it is called cipha.
And some are in the genitals' proper pannus which nature prepared at the beginning of water, until it is separated from the other, and it is the loop of the genitals between the white part that we have said, and it is not water but blood.
And the generation of this hernia is due to which injury occurs in the genitals, so that the substance is poured into them, and some times it happens through a blow struck on the genitals.
And this moisture is not colored, because the color of it is either declining towards yellow or blood-red, or brown, or black, or fermenting, or fresh white, and it is water that is more.
And the signs by which this accumulation of water is known: for if it is in the white part that we have mentioned, then the swelling is red, declining slightly towards length as well as the shape of a bull, and appears the genitals, because the moisture contains all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper pannus, then the swelling is at the beginning of the water, and so it looks like another bull to men.
And if the moisture is between the loop of the genitals and the white part, then it is difficult to feel.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture in the swelling, then examine the shape of the place where it is inserted; and according to which water is discharged on the surface of the insertion, judge from that what it is inside.
Therefore when we come to the cure of it with iron, then it is necessary that we order the servant to be heated if water is possible, and wash his clothes.
And then have him sit down on both feet for a little while, and take off from him the heavy clothing.
And then place yourself on the left side of him, and order the servant to put his hand on the right side of him, which extends his arm to one of his feet at the joint, and at the same time cut with the hook between the loop of the genitals and the beginning of a miracle in the belly.
And then take a knife and cut the loop of the genitals from its place along the length up to where it is joined with the small intestine.
And let the section be made according to a rule of equal distance from the line that you should mark on the genitals' skin, as far as it reaches to the white part.
And then cut it, and look at it, and keep it so that you do not cut it; and your cutting should be made by half an inch below where you have marked it, so that it is suspended on the water's edge, and carefully examine your cutting according to the quantity that you can.
Then pierce the white part completely with a wide hole, and pour out all the water.
Then separate between two lips of the section with a nail, and extend the white part to the back; and do not touch the loop of the genitals together, and cut it in that way which is most suitable for you. And cut it with all its parts or in pieces, and especially the white part, because if you do not scrutinize the cutting of it well, the water will not return.
But if the water is poured out from that far from its loop in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section on the white part, return it to him, and then adjust the two lips of the loop of the genitals together with a stitch, and then heal those arrows as well as the others, so that it is cured.
And if you suspect the wound is corrupted by another illness, then cover what you have done with a cloth, and extract it from its suspenders, and immediately treat it as described above.
If the water is collected in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise the part according to what you have done with the other; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
Then wash the wound with water and immerse it in oil or rose oil; then put another cloth, which you have immersed in wine and oil, over the navel and the mirabile of the abdomen; then open a double cloth and powder, and untie what is bound with this following shape:
Then place two cloths and compress them with wool wetted with oil or rose oil according to this shape; then bind the extremities with cowhides or wet wool, and attach them to the brazer of the breeches, so that one extremity is between the other and the navel, and the other between the crotch and the part of the panties, and both extremities over two thorns which are under two thongs, and all the tightness be adjusted in the brazer of the breeches.
In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cauterization instead of surgery; it is done by taking cauterization with a sharp knife and incising at the codendo of the genitals, and igniting according to what you have described within that a white capsule containing water, then you do cauterization according to this shape: And it is formed like a Greek letter.
Then pierce that capsule and ignite it so that all the moisture is expelled.
Then break that capsule with nails, and extract it with a nail, and cauterize it with a sharp fire; then incise according to what you can, so that you exterminate everything; and keep away from the wound that the fire does not touch it.
Then know that this operation is less dangerous and further removed from the flow of blood than the surgery; and better than the operation by cutting.
But if, during the time of surgery or cauterization, or the flow of blood, it causes you discomfort, then know that you cure what bothers you with this water, with the cure which is according to what is said.
But if the patient is a bit ill and does not expect the second operation because of its horrible aspect, then administer perforation according to what I have described in water; and it is when it is certain that he has it, according to what we have said about signs, that this hernia is watery.
Then return the patient to a raised table, then pierce the apoplexy in the lowest part of the body with a knife, and make the piercing according to the length of the body.
And be wide opening within that all the water flows out.
Then place a cloth over the area and tie it up tightly; then leave it for a moment, so that the water runs out completely. Then treat that area so that the plague is healed.
But if discomfort is caused by the escape of water in that hour when you pierce it: and water is not made except with water which comes out of the white capsule at the orifice of the plague, causing discomfort and preventing the entry of water; then know that you put into the plague a small instrument or object, the form of which is preceded; or fasten in the opening of the plague a little thing.
Then know that the water returns and remains for a few months or years; and when it is accumulated, then pierce according to that way of doing, because the patient's days will soon end.
Chapter LIII.
Of Surgery on Tendon Hernia and its Treatment.
Know that in surgery on this hernia is a great danger of death in the major cases; but my view, its dismissal and being saved by it is better.
And I am reminded of the operation on that person and the spices of the apoplexies.
Therefore, I say that the apoplexy comes into the body where the genitals are joined, and is caused by excess fluid due to some disease: or by impact.
And it is the color of the apoplexy according to the color of the body, and it does not change with pain; and it is a heavy apoplexy.
And there is a very hard apoplexy which is lapified, of which the color is dark, and does not cause pain.
In some cases it is caused by the inflammation of the arcerias, and by the swelling of the veins; therefore, the reminder of it can be perceived, or by the swelling of the veins.
But water that is caused by the swelling of the arcerias is known when you compress that person with a glove or cloth; and it is not understood that he touches it.
But water that is caused by the swelling of veins is not scattered by anything due to compression with a glove or cloth.
It is even possible that, on this species, surgery be done and on the other parts of the body; and it is because you incise the codendo of the genitals, and extract them from their suspensory, and attach them again, and incise according to what you have done with another.
Therefore, if the body has already been consolidated, then extract the hernia and incise it.
And if there is any attachment within that cause of the capsule, or between what is between the baysels, then know that you untie all that attachment and incise it with a circular incision.
But if it is the birth of flesh in the place of attachment which is behind, then know that you incise all that is of him and extract the hernia as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is finished, then fill the plague with lamb-fat in rose oil and wine; and immediately treat that area with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the Treatment of Tendon Hernia.
There is an apoplexy wrapped in a wrapper similar to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to make movements and walking on the patient's feet.
And in the treatment of this illness is by fear because of which there is a reminder of it.
However, I say that surgery be done on that person according to what was said above.
And I say that you return the patient to a raised table; and then attach the suspensory of the testicles to their cavities; and then incise the codendo of the genitals with the tie which is between the baysels, which are separated from the hernia; and let another minister do what you wish, and extend that one with violence.
Then incise according to the long cross in the right of the veins within which the veins are visible.
Then extract from all parts as you have said, with the extraction of the arcias which are in the temples.
Then put in those a needle which has double threads, and tie it at the first location where it occurs; and tie it again at the last of them. Then incise that one at the middle location by a cross-cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is caused by foul moisture and corruption.
And then cure the plague with a cure for other plagues so that they do not fall from the vessels of one of the two genders, because it is bad for this.
But if it happens that all the vessels are cut off, then cover them so that the testicles are removed or the testicles, for by this they are deprived of all nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and wither away, or do so that they are not fertilized.
Chapter .lxv.
On the cure for an intestinal hernia.
The appearance of this hernia is by section which, on the one hand, runs along the belly from the navel to the mirabile belly, so that when it ruptures some of the intestines come out through that rupture;
And this rupture is either from the ciphac or from the protrusion of it, and these two things happen for different reasons: either by percussion, or by a loud noise, or by a sudden movement, or for some other difficult reason, or because of a similarity.
And the sign of this is that it happens little by little over a long period of time, not suddenly, and is a swelling inside the peritoneum for which the ciphac compresses the intestine;
And the sign of it is when there is section in the ciphac, for at the beginning there is a violent pain suddenly; and it is a swelling that appears different to what is near, and that is because of the intestine being pushed out, and the belly being split where the ciphac is.
And some are overlooked by the intestine's thread, and this hernia is called intestinal zibiral.
And some become air-filled, and some run in the intestine's fissure, and here it is kept, and this causes great pain to the patient; and sometimes bad pain, and most often when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these diseases with heat there is caution, so that one does not injure the patient with it.
And the way to operate on it is that you order the patient to return the intestine to its cavity if he agrees to his return, and place him upside down between your hands, and raise the legs.
And you cut the hernia cord that connects the testicles at its end, and incise the entire cord longwise; and then you place it in two pieces according to what is necessary to open the incision for them.
And if, in the section, according to the quantity that you can do it so that from it the intestine is overlooked.
And then cut off those ciphac-like things that are left of the hernia cord, so as not to leave any of it;
And then you cut the testicle in two parts, so as not to cut it in half; and that it is between a white ciphac-like thing, which is left of the hernia cord, and another ciphac-like thing, and complete the incision according to the attachment that is on the back of the patient.
And then you cut the hernia cord at its ends, and extend the white ciphac on the left hand side to the hernia opening; and order the minister to extend it upward, and you dissolve the attachment that is behind with a complete solution.
And you search in the patient's testicles to find out if there is any cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white ciphac. If you don't find any cause for this, then you should look elsewhere.
And then cut off the hernia cord by section from which it has been described, and this will cure and relieve pain in the patient as we have said above.
And then administer a submergent soap, and cut off the plague; and then administer the thread that we have described (and sometimes white ciphac is cauterized, which we mentioned above as a way to stop bleeding due to the sudden movement of the patient), and leave the thread inside it;
If the patient' side is late, then cut off a tail of water, and place it inside it as we have said.
And this will cure the plague with another treatment for the plague.
Chapter .lxxxvi.
On the wind hernia.
In this hernia, there is nothing seen that has been done to cure it.
And the first said that this is done in order to cure it as we have described for hernia ventosa, which is to place the intestine into its cavity with ease of movement; and then dry it up in the middle of it in the space where the swelling occurs with water that makes it move, so that the intestines do not come out.
And this will cure the plague as we have said, and make sure it is cured.
Chapter  .lxxii.
On the difficulty that arises in the legs.
And some break in the legs as we have said above, and then expose the place.
Do not send to any gender any cause of the intestines in the gender; and if you do so, it is few; and return them all.
If it is prolonged by time with water, a crack appears in the ciphac within which the intestines are pushed into the ciphac; and this happens as we have said above, that is to say, because the ciphac extends; and then it softens up and swells up, and it comes out.
And the cure for it is by cauterization, as we have described above.
And some are cured with it in this way: the patient jumps on his back between your hands, and then dries up the place of the rupture by section according to the amount of three threads.
And then tighten the white ciphac that is behind the hernia cord;
And then take the thread and place it on the prominent part of the ciphac, and press it to the belly.
And then cut off the two ends of the thread on the prominent part of the ciphac, and adjust one end to the other with a knot.
And then remove the end of the thread, and don't cut off the ciphac from all sides, nor extend the intestine, or any other cause as we have said above in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that one with the treatment of bloodletting, and if you feel the pulse, clean it up and restore the pulse before it becomes hardened; for the pulse is contracted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
Cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to salvation.
Chapter .lxxviii.
On the Softening of the Testicles
Are softened for this reason, since the flesh that is between them is softened, and attention must be paid to it.
Then whoever is being treated must lie down according to his side, and the whole scrotum that has been softened should be placed on top of it; and two incisions should be made on either side, joining them together.
And if you want to, cut off the excess of the scrotum with three or four incisions and fix it tightly with a suture.
Then you should cut between the sutures; then treat all other wounds with bloodletting, so that they are healed and that the pulse is restored;
Chapter .lxxx.
On Castration
You should know that in our law castration is prohibited, except for a specific reason which I will state here; and it is not necessary to mention this reason unless there are two reasons, the first being so that the doctor who treats him knows about it when he is questioned about it, and the second is that we may need to castrate other animals for our benefit by using them as breeding stock, such as horses, pigs, and similar animals.
Then I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by ablation (cutting off) or by a section (incision).
In the castration performed by ablation, the way of operation is that you cut off the animal's tail while it is still alive; thus its testes are softened and the sperm is removed, so that it cannot be conceived again. Then return those to your hand within which they are to be held, so that they do not appear with the touch.
In the castration performed by incision and section, if you have the animal, hold it with your left hand and press the scrotum of its testes with your right hand.
Then tie up the testicles with a string, and cut them off from each side with two incisions; then process the pieces.
Then cut off those too if you want to; And do not apply any treatment to those of the testicles except for the subtle one which is applied to the veins.
This method of castration is better, since ablation makes the beast desire not to copulate;
Then cure the wound so that it heals.
Chapter .lxx.
On the Treatment of Hermaphroditism
Hermaphroditism in men is due to two causes: one is that the space between the testicles is closed; another is that there is a penis, since it is a combination of male and female characteristics.
Some have this condition, which is present in the scrotum of the testes.
In women, it is another species; and it is that the female's penis is like two male testicles combined together; and its scrotum is like a man's.
The treatment is of three kinds: two for men, and one for women. Since it is necessary that you cut the flesh to fit it together so as to avoid the odour of that one; and then treat all other wounds with bloodletting.
In the second species of men, where there is urine in the scrotum of the testes, no treatment or operation is needed for it.
Chapter  . XXI.
On the Lancing and Cutting of Flesh for Female Causes
Lancing that is firm is adjusted to natural causes, but it is not cut off unless it becomes too large, and it is kept under control; and some women have this condition, which is like a lace in men, and it is cut within the vagina so as not to interfere with intercourse.
Then return the excess of the lancing to your hand or to another person, and cut it off.
And do not cut too deeply, especially in the area of the genitals; so that there is no flow of blood to the area.
Then treat that one with bloodletting so that it heals.
Some hidden flesh that grows inside the mother, and it is very hot; it is like coa (and I call this "hot meat"); then we cut off that one as we do with lancing, and treat that one so that it heals.
Chapter  . lxxii.
On the Treatment of Gouty Fever (Gout)
It is that the female' penis not be pierced, or that it be a small hole. It is either due to nature or due to accident.
Accidental is when the gouty fever that preceded it is severe; and that one is caused by bad meat or by subtle poison or spice.
It is either caused by bad meat from the mother, or by her belly button, or by the pus on the top of it, or by the pus at the bottom of it; and it prohibits coition and pregnancy and childbirth, and it strongly discourages milk.
The knowledge of that one is gained through watching the mother closely; if the opposition is apparent, then certainly; but if it is not apparent, then you should ask about it with a trusted person or a doctor.
If the opposition is by subtle poison, and it is between the two lips, then you should cut and remove that one.
Then place a powder between the two lips; and with a pointed cautery, mark both sides at the same time.
Then place the woman on her side; spread out her legs, and with a sharp instrument, cut through both lips to stop the subtle poison from spreading; and if the opposition is apparent, then continue.
Then take a piece of cloth and place it over the area; keep it in place for the time needed so that the area does not become hardened.
If the poison is thick and spicy, then cut it with a sharp knife or a blade; also, you can use salt water to clean it.
If the opposition is due to meat, then hang that one upside down, and cut it.
Then give the medicine that stops the flow of blood, such as astringent and bitter herbs; also, give milk to taste, and adjust it to the taste of two eggs.
Then administer a wide, flat spoonful of plummy metal; so that the wound does not become hardened too much.
Keep that one for a few days and then administer cold water.
Then treat it with the other treatment of hardening so that it heals.
Sometimes, during the birth of a child, some flesh is born; then cut it according to this method. If that one is due to cold flesh, and the cold flesh during pregnancy is not caused by taking something in any way.
Chapter   . lxxiii.
On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids and Red Swellings that Occur in the Rectum of Women
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
I have already spoken about the types of these things and their characteristics, as well as those that are cured and those that are not cured.
I say that hemorrhoids and their throbs are when they are in the mother's pucker and do not appear in her feeling, but in those there is no cure by applying fire.
Those that are in the mother' orifice above which she feels sensation are the ones that are cured.
And when you place the woman in a mayso cloth and rub her with hot furrows or a sharp blade, and cut them with razors.
Then sprinkle those with the powder of the medicine that you have cut from one of the powders by chewing it, thus adding ashes and resembling those.
Then tie their feet for an hour, and then place them in hot water.
And if the flow of the pain persists, then prepare them in a decoction of sumac and peppercorns and ginger and resembling herbs.
Then take wheat flour and make a paste with honey and vinegar, and place it on their two feet.
And if the pain has disappeared, it is good; but if not, then bind them with two veils, and cut their breasts.
Then take wool and immerse those in the juice of coriander or the juice of arnica or the juice of hawthorn, and bind them to the place; and heal the place with hot water inside that it may be healed.
Then heal that inside that it may be healed.
Chapter. LVII.
Of the piercing of a sore in the mother.
Many species of blisters occur in the mother, thus causing chapping and blistering and ulceration and pustules and fistulas of hemorrhoids and raguarries and thyles and other blisters. I have already spoken about these diseases and their characteristics and the cures for them in the division.
And when I say in this treatise about the cure of the blisters that are found in the mother and how to treat them if you want to know how to perform the surgery by applying fire.
Then consider whether the pain of the blister in its beginning is acute by percussion and fluids and fever, and often whether it becomes hard and whether sensation appears on it; then do not pierce it with fire, but heal it with hot water that helps to mature it so that the acute nature of the accident passes.
Then when you place the woman on a bench that has two; and she leans on her two feet from behind her belly, and her legs are spread wide, and pauses her hands below her hips, and ties something to her with a rope convenable to water.
Then the woman approaches from the right side and brings the instrument that is appropriate to pierce the orifice of the mother, its form will depend on those cases that will be done.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you remain with your back to the mother of the woman, and through the instrument it enters into the mother and all the malut is within her pucker. If the instrument is larger than the mother's pucker, then when you place powder on the texture of the mother's pucker so that it prevents the entry of any instrument into the mother's pucker.
And when you place the liquid that runs in the instrument from above and the minister has the instrument and mixes the liquid inside so that it pierces the orifice of the mother.
And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and wet and cold, then when you dry those with a sponge by pouring hot water on them.
And when the pain is relieved, then place in the water a sponge that is submerged in rose oil or green oil and has no stinging; and pause the blood,7 in the pucker of the mother's pucker.
Then hang the mother upside down and place on its head a clean cloth that is submerged in water in which the color is clear.
Then it is cured, then bind it for two days by applying hot water inside so that it may be healed.
Some women are washed and rinsed in water until it is cristallized, then they are submerged in hot water with a hair of arnica or a long hair of herb, and returned to the enguent.
And if the pain is deep inside the mother that has been washed, then you are forbidden to cure it by applying fire, but heal it with hot water that I have said in the division.
Chapter. LVII.
Of teaching mothers how to cure their blisters when they are in a second figure that is unnatural.
A necessary cause is that the mother touches in its beginning the figure of natural childhood by signs of her, and it is because when you see the woman express herself from behind and desire to smell the air, and above it is enveloped by the air that comes from her, and quickly she smells him; then know that this part is a second figure that is natural, and it is his smelling on her head, and the second after that hangs or hangs on her navel.
Then when you see those signs, then the mother's belly is twisted, so that the embryo smells gently; when it smells him on her head, then send it away, and let those excessive things be removed with good washing.
But that which is another part of this figure is unnatural and not pleasing, because when the embryo is lying on her back and his head between her legs and her feet, and her mother's hand one, or at her neck; Or is lying on her head and her mother' hand one, or at her navel, and firmly it has turned on her chest, and resembling those natural figures that are not pleasing.
A necessary cause is that the mother is wise and subtle in all these things, and that she guards against error and deception.
I show you all those figures, and which is right in them so that it may be understood by water and stand on it.
When the embryo is lying on her head by natural goodness; and that which is violent on the woman, and it is difficult to perform; and sometimes her virtue has already been weakened, then she should smell it, or what women have of him, and evaporate his sweat with fenugrec and rosewater.
Then place the mother between her two feet and make a small hole with it for the second time, and seal that with a damp cloth so that water may flow through it. Then press the woman' belly until she smells him.
If they do not smell, then the woman is cristallized with a spray of herbs and a spray of fenugrec by enveloping it.
Then order her to wash and freeze her, that she may be refreshed; and put the mouth of her and her nose for an hour, because the embryo is often forgotten.
And if the two more of the foot are still sore at the beginning, then know that you should reduce them slowly little by little. May also if you do not obey the instrument, then pause the woman over a board and lift her feet off the ground, and bring the board close to the ground; and the woman be held so that she does not fall down from the impact.
And if the rest are not turned in and take the foot out, then cut them off and pull out the bone of the foot or tie it to its side with a rope and pull it out equally, for that is still sore.
When the foot is placed on its own feet, then know that you should impel them to stand up, and bring the foot small by small, and bind it, and take one leg of it and stretch them little by little.
May also when they are born between the thighs, then command him to squeeze, and make them defecate equally, for that is still sore if God wills it.
And if it is not sore with the water that I have mentioned, then return the foot little by little until you pause it in the second natural position, for that is still sore after the birth.
And if it is forbidden with all the water that I have mentioned, then take the muscle of the aloe and the dissolved gum, and strike them together in a mortar for good pounding, and then pour the blood of the woman, the lowest part of her belly. Then bring that caesar in running water, so that it cleans the hernia.
And when the parts of him are no longer sore, then make him submerse in mint water and pause him. And when he has been submerged in mint water for an hour, then bring him to sit on a board, and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and remove it, and press the lowest part of his belly lightly with compression, because the foot is still sore.
The birth of the foot laterally hanging on one of its hands. Is already opening little by little with her own hand, but if you cannot do it, then raise the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the mattress, and strike her thighs violently, and then administer with great care the muscles that I have mentioned.
And if the child is born, then make her sit on a board, and study the reduction of her hand, and bind the foot in its second natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to squeeze herself until she is still sore.
The birth of the foot on her hip, with its hands spread out, and the sole of the foot is at the back of her mother's thigh. Then the mother should hold the foot and roll it little by little, and make it easy to turn.
And when it is bound, then pause on its head that water that I have mentioned with oil and muscle.
Then command her to massage herself little by little, and when she has finished doing it, then make her sit on a board and lean to the right, and command her to squeeze with great care. The exit of the baby is prepared next to the mother's side.
When it comes out of the mother's side in this way, consider it, and then you cut the second with your own hand within that it is evacuated of its moisture.
And if the foot hangs over her face and hip, then you cut off the umbilical cord so that it is not held and does not die.
Then bind the foot to the lower parts within that you pause the second one, and command the woman to squeeze herself several times, and let him stand if God wills it.
The exit of two or more babies. Know that twins move their eyes, and sometimes three or four of them are born, but if they are not alive, they are a natural cause, and not for death.
Consider that they are multiplied, one second, and they are separated by an edge, distinguishing between them in the navel of each of them; And some eyes are still sore because it is a natural cause, and not for death. Also, consider that two fetuses are born by natural cause, but if they do not move, they are not alive yet.
And if they are difficult to understand due to their figures not being natural, then you should take care of them as I have mentioned when they are born.
And if the mother is soft and gentle, and slow, then she should prepare herself according to all figures of her hand towards salvation.
Recall that it is formed in the mother' womb from embryos, and some are aborted.
Some are formed in the mother's body one, two, three, four and so on up to fifty and seven; and it has already been verified that a woman gets six when all of them are formed, which causes a woman to fail due to measurements made by the glorious sages.
Then know that it is in the science of the mother as it is strong for her like a small appearance of water, and therefore pause at water because it is small.
Chapter 67.
Of the extraction of the foot when it is dead.
When you care for the dead foot with water that I have mentioned in the division of medicine, and it is not still alive, then you should use surgery on her hand, because know if the woman is of good health and not an alms to which she is lost by accident.
Then the woman should be placed on her back on her own hip, and her head should be lowered towards the ground and her thighs raised.
The minister should hold her from two parts or from one side on the ground so that the flesh of her does not spread out too much after the extraction of the foot.
And if it is still sore, then you order her to lean on the right side and make her sneeze with a mixture of oil of almond, fenugreek, and mint.
And place the woman's hand near those odors and mucus, and enter the mother with ease, and hold her place where the nails are placed on the body.
And place it conveniently: then consider whether the body is ready to place on its head, and then fix the nails in its holes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or let the beard, or in its throat, or in the spaces near the ribs, or let the hips.
And if you send it on the feet of him, then in the penile, or in the middle of the ribs.
And when he has the nail on his right hand, and place the curvature of him in that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and enter with ease and fix the nail in some of those places that we have said, so that it reaches to the source of pain.
Then place and fix another nail on him, or the third one if it is necessary, so that he is a trap of gold, and not a cut according to its rectitude alone.
And then it is better that he be made whole at once, so that the pain of him is eased thus when done in a single stroke as the eradication of him.
And when the water that is between them is softened; and if any part of him is held back, then consider that the woman puts some oil on it and enters with a wand and turns with that water that is held back.
Then if the part of the body is forgotten, then the nails are exchanged from place to place which is put there first; and do so that all the body is forgotten.
And if the hand is injured in front of the other one, and it is not possible to reduce that one by its curl, then consider that it is wrapped around that one; and then take off that one that all is forgotten, and cut it or at the joint of the hand or in the crotch.
Then do so on the other hand and on the two feet.
And if the head of the body is large, or the curl happens in the irrigation, or it is in the middle of the water that is adjusted, then consider that you enter between the fingers and split the head and remove the water, or that you take off that one with a tool called "alundered", the form of which will come to the forms of the other tools in the chapter that is appropriate for this.
And apparently do so if the body is large in nature: and then consider that you cut that one with an instrument, or take it off with a tool as we have said; and then take out the bones with tweezers.
And if the head is injured and its curl happens at the throat, then consider that you split it so that the moisture that is in the feet is spilled.
And if it does not cause complication or difficulty, and you do so quickly as you can.
And if the belly is injured in front of the back, or it is in the water-pass, then consider that you pierce that one where the moisture that is in him passes.
And if the body is on its feet, then the attraction of him is light and his direction to the mouth of the mother is also light.
And if the belly is injured in front of the back, then consider that you take off that one with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and split the belly so that the water that is in them runs.
And if the other members are held back and turned the head, then the woman enters with her left hand; if the mouth of the mother is open, then enter with your right hand, and seek that one with its fingers, and throw it into the mouth of the mother, and place a nail in him, or two nails, and throw him in.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by a swell that happens to him, then consider that it is not moved on top of him; and if it is not, then prepare an effusion of warm water. And administer poultices; and follow the patient with water that softens and moistens him.
And if the body is on its side, then consider that it is rolled over; and water is administered that we have said in the living body.
Then, if water is not possible, then consider that you are cut into pieces, and then remove them.
And when there is no reason left inside the second one.
And when you have finished your entire operation, then administer water that we have said in the swelling caues that happen to the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood from the wound, then send it into strict water and administer the other cure.
I have already seen a woman in her belly that was dead of the fetus, and another fetus is born on top of him, and then he dies who is born. It happens to him that it becomes swollen after a long time in the belly of his mother; and then he swells within that it is hot, and begins to sweat.
I have already called for the cure of him, and treated him for a long time, and the plague has not been consolidated yet.
Then I continued to work on him of some causes of poultices that are strong and attractive, and I cut an arm from him, and passed a few days, and cut another arm; and I was very surprised when in the belly there was not an arm.
Then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I cured the plague of him, and took out from it some bones, and the woman who was in her own right position, and has already lived for a long time in that way, and then he recovered a little bit of his arm.
I did not find this strange, but I know that science and help to water is artifice from the mother for medicine by administering it.
The forms of the tools that are necessary to remove the fetus.
Form of spinning:
This is the form of strength in which you hold two free ends, and in which there are two twists at each end of two strings. But this form is not so subtle as the twist of string, and it should be done with a needle or a stick or a boy's rod.
And be the length of each string two ditz and the margin of each two fingers that a twist is made, and the length of each one is an arm's length and half; and in the middle place of two strings are two adjustments of this rope strings that already are closed, whose lengths are half an arm's length and a little less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mother' mouth so that it is open to them when you turn the two prescribed twists.
Another form similar to the last, but less subtle and more light:
So made of ebony or boxwood according to the appearance of forceps. But at the end of them there should be two more additions, and the length of each addition is a palm, and their width is two fingers.
And when you want to cover the leg with a cloth, then make the servant hold it up between the patient's legs while you place it there. And then, with the instrument held in this way according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mouth of the leg within which the servant is to move, so that the surgeon wants it, place your hand on it.
The shape of the curve which the ancients described:
The form that is propelled by what propels it:
The form of a pit which is filled with the head:
And it is assembled with the forceps which are inserted in the end, several times, and some holes are made long according to this form, several times, to which forceps are attached, inserted according to this form, and some holes are drilled. The form of a pit little:
The form of having one without a spine:
The form of having two:
The form of a staff having two ends, by which the head is cut off:
The form of two staffs long:
All these instruments are to be used, and when the medicine is easier to operate on and more suitable for the patient's body, then the surgeon does it and the servant helps him, according to the amount of the medicine.
And you do not open these instruments already prepared, for the need for them is not justified.
Of extracting the second.
When the second is held back, then you command the woman to hold her breath and place your hand on her mouth and nose, and if this makes her sneeze, it is good.
But if not, then you take a vessel and pierce the lid with it and pour in some herbs to soothe the woman' mouth, and with a cotton swab and Arabic and Cassia wood and Saint John' herb apply them to her mouth. All these herbs or some of them are soaked in water in the vessel, and you pour it on the fire.
And then place a tube of cloth over the woman' mouth, and hold it so that the steam goes into her cavity.
And then you make her sneeze, with this, and the second is gone.
If it remains, then you command the woman to dip her left hand in olive oil or an extract of alfalfa and insert it into her crotch, and if she does not feel any attraction, then you take her right hand and dip it as described above so that no discomfort is caused to the mother. After you have removed all trace of this, you can easily change her clothes, left to right, with ease.
And if her mouth is closed, then we have already described to you the cure with sneezing and with the medicine of the water with herbs.
But if not all these causes have been described to you, then you guard against her doing this in a repetitive way: instead, you make her sneeze with pepper and honey; for this cure, it is good that she take it three times a day and that she avoid attachment.
But when it is taken in, it is painful to the head and stomach: then you make the woman lie down, and then give her a vaporous and pleasant smell, and if this is not enough, then administer it by inhalation.
Some of the Ancients have already prescribed steam inhalation with dried fig leaves.
The form of an instrument which the servant inhales from the woman's mouth, so that she does not retain menses and the second:
Is made of ebony or lead.
And the thin end is placed in the cavity and the wide end is over the fire, and the inhalation is made above the embers of the fire.
And hold her so that she consumes this inhalation and repeat it.
Of clearing the anus of a non-perforated child.
Mouth and ass: this is not for children who have not been pierced: it is subtle and painful. Then tell the woman to pierce her anus with this needle: and if not, then pierce it with a staff and keep it away from her hole.
And place that one in the water, and make it steam: and if it does not, then apply oil to it.
If you fear that it will be painful, then place a tube on the child' bottom, and prevent him from defecating until he wants to.
And it is already happening that the child' bottom will be painful because of consolidation of plague or abscess: and if this consolidation is cut, then it is cured with water which we have described for the cure and for the ointment.
Of curing the fistulas which enter from there.
The fistulas that enter from there will be treated with a poultice and a grossness of the contents which enter from there, far away from the child' anus or in the space between one part of it.
It is a fistula or much.
And when this nodulation is old and flows with clear white fluid or subtle pus, and some of these fistulas are penetrating.
And those that penetrate are known by the exit of water and air: some are used for the exit of the child' air; and if it is not, then the child' air leaves through them, and they are painful to the touch.
And some of these fistulas enter the bladder, and part of it enters the pelvis: and some of them enter the joint of the crotch, and part of it enters the neck of the womb.
And in the water which is conogued by a fistula that enters the child' bottom and does not, you insert the tongue of truth into the child' bottom: and you apply oil or lead to the fistula when it is painful.
But if not, then insert a sharp object into it to feel the pain or hair of a horse, and if you do not, then place it in your mouth to feel the pain or hair on your tongue.
And if you do not feel this pain or hair on your tongue, then know that it is not penetrating: and you will be cured with oil or lead.
And when the fistula enters the bladder or part of it enters the womb, then the meaning is clear: and it means urine from her and do not allow her to enter into this place with medicine that will solidify.
But if it enters the joint of the crotch or part of it enters the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then know that the meaning is clear: and it means that the water comes from here, and do not allow her to enter into this place with medicine that will solidify; nor does it mean that she feels pain in her circulation when it enters the joint. And it does not mean that you should give her a hot poultice.
And in all those vessels that penetrate there is not a cure of all, and the cure of those is work and futility of physicians who have closed them.
Maze in that which does not penetrate and is new, healing by iron is hoped according to what I recommend, and what I have already done and tried.
And that the patient lies between your two legs and raises their legs within them, the cushions are tilted towards his stomach, and approach a blade of iron or an arrow if it is in the tunnel, so that you know the place where the pain comes from.
And if that hurts the patient's buttocks, then cover it so that you do not enter the tiny hole in the buttocks.
And if you feel in the tiny hole that has already penetrated and become exposed, another place where you feel pain between the tiny hole and some flesh or meat, then certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for it is not cured there, as I have said.
But others say that it heals in certain men quickly.
And from the medicine by which healing is hoped for quickly in him, you ignore the subtle cauterization according to the width of the tunnel, so that it is preceded, and enters that iron into the tunnel before it passes through the buttocks; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those carns adjusted to the fistula are tight like a feather from an eagle.
And then cure that with covered calyxes wrapped in bandage before all those carns are tight, and then cure that with medicines to generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, it is well; and if not, then it is not cured by any other medicine.
And if the pain enters and does not penetrate within the tiny hole that is in the buttocks, and between that and the pain that is gently touching some flesh or meat, and sometimes the tunnel goes through what cuts the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the tunnel, and then cut the skin, and if you see it drying, and it is dried at the end of the tunnel where the extremities of the pain are felt, and by that pain it is freed and cured.
And then disinfect those fistulated carns which are assembled like a tube of feather from an eagle, and they do not grow because of any other cause.
And if a flux of sweat comes between you and your work when you are spreading those carns, then the mild water that is used and the leach instrument cauterizes with fire or with acute medicines, for cauterization with fire adjusts well to two habits: it is dried up from those carns adjusted, and removes the excess of moisture.
And then cure that with covered calyxes wrapped in bandage or a three-sided bandage before the place gets swollen, and then after that, cure the gout with hard flesh that is generated and consolidated.
And thus medicines that are strictness and excision; when they have been restored, it is then healed, and you do not fear recurrence.
And if the tunnel has already penetrated deep within the buttocks and its surface is long, then enter the tiny hole in the buttocks and feel it.
And thus if you feel the pain and between you and it there is gently touching of flesh or meat, and it is close to penetration, then do not operate on it by that way according to trust and hope.
And the cause is administered in it by three ways: either that it cauterizes that according to what I have said; or that it dries up that within which you can reach the cavity of it so that you can possibly enter the calyxes and cure that propedly; and do not process it by cutting it, for it will hurt you very much; or that it extends that touch gently and makes pus that you dry up that within which is close to the buttocks, according to what I have said, or with pain or with an instrument of sharp extremities, and then disinfect those fistulated carns which are in the section within the buttocks where you can make a percrustation; and then try to restore all the plague by cutting it, and if the pus hole does not consolidate, and the tunnel opens up at the entrance of the buttocks, and lets out pus from the patient. And some times the tunnel is finished in this way: when you enter the pain into the tunnel, and it is near the surface of the skin on the side of the buttocks, and at the margin of the buttocks, then take an extremely sharp instrument to prepare the flesh according to this form:
and enter that calyx wrapped in five leaves or between those leaves; and then enter the pain into the tunnel within which you can reach the cavity of it.
And if it penetrates on the side of the buttocks towards the middle, then you take that calyx from it and feel it within; and then extract the end of the calyx and adjust both ends with two sharp points, and tie one of them, and let it rest for a day or two, and when you feel that calyx in the flesh, then make those cuts between which those carns are included which are between the two ends of the calyx and which fall.
And then cure the plague within which is consolidated and healed.
And if the orifice of the tunnel is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that suits you, but do not operate on it by that way according to trust and hope; and then make it within which is healed.
The form of the spike with which the tunnel is split: its curve is sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that you do not hurt yourself in it, for that is not necessary, as sometimes happens.
Of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the section of those.
Emorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the buttocks resembling grass, or those are with grease of fat. And they are small and large, and the blood runs from them at times, and it is one, and they are very close together, and they go out of the buttocks, and at the ends of it.
And those which are outside the buttocks are according to the second part: either they have a little moisture, of which runs yellow or a little blood on the skin constantly, and they are according to the color of the skin.
And the cure for that which is inside the buttocks is that you order the patient to strain it and squeeze it within so that the hemorrhoids appear to you. And then you cut yourself off and suspend it on a nail or whatever you have, and then feel those with your fingernail.
And if those nails are not holding them by their humidity and soften them, then take them with a sharp or rough cloth, or a woolen blanket, and pull those off with your fingers, and then feel those and sprinkle over them some dried powder according to the cut, so that they are at those places where cauterization is preceded in the cauterization of the chapter. And then cure those with the other cure within which is healed.
And if the buttocks do not obey to exit, then order the patient to strain it with a small bite, and wash it with water that is in the buttocks and which obeys to exit slightly when the patient strains it.
May be the hemorrhoids are far from the buttocks, then the cause of them is a light blow, and because you have hit those with your thumb, or with an oil, and have cut those, and then treat them with water that I had said within to be healed.
And whoever wants to make an incision, follow this way: take a thread rolled up and put it in the needle and push that into the hemorrhoid at its end, and make the needle enter in the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread on the split of the needle, and stretch the hemorrhoid strongly, and tie the thread and pull out the needle.
Do this to everyone, and leave one uncut, so that the excess of the blood runs from it.
Then put over the buttock a cloth in oil or wax; and put that on the chest and order the patient to lie down. Then let that fall into a box; and when it is falling, treat those with oil or with another cure within so that they are healed.
And because those old remedies do not work in that medicine, then it is customarily said that you scratch those with the point of a spatula or with your thumb within so that they are made wet and are host to those above them, which prevents those from solidifying; and treat those within they have solidified.
Then you remove those with a fierce razor more quickly than the first cut that causes pain, and treat those within as if they were healed.
You should know that scrofula is cured by a second color on the body similar to a clove's head, and it is spread throughout the whole body, especially in the feet and hands, and through them pain comes, so that you must treat the whole body with attention.
And then it is customarily said that the scar be cut where it is located in the circle of the clove, and be removed with scissors or oil, and be cured from its root; and treat it.
And if you want, cauterize the second that precedes in the first chapter.
May be a warts is a small, round, hard, raised, and sore-looking spot on the surface of the body, and it sometimes appears on the children.
And treatment of them is that you stretch and cut those, or that you pull out with a thread within so that it comes out. And if you want, cauterize it, according to what has been said, with fire or with acute medicine.
May be a hives is a small, raised, and sore spot on the surface of the body that sometimes appears in the back, and when it gets touched, it feels like a bee sting; and it comes out from the body.
And treatment of them is that you take a pen-like tube with a hole or a needle-like tube and make it strong, and put that over the hives where they are contained in the circle of the tube's ends; then turn your hand over the tube so that you cut those out where they go around the tube, and then treat your hand against the tube within so that you cut the hives from their root, and let your hand rest on the tube within so that the hives are eradicated from their roots.
And if you want, make it with a tube of iron or of steel according to this form:
Be the end of the tube that comes out smoothly, softly (if it is not pierced), wrapped in such a way that the liquid goes into it, and its rotation.
And if you want, cauterize the hives according to what has been said in the first chapter of cauterization with acute medicine.
Of the shape of instruments that are administered to give care.
Some hives are cured with silver or melted copper or hammered copper; and some hives are cured with those small instruments according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of children is small; and the ones that are administered in the treatment of adults are large, and the curves of those instruments are made with care.
The shape of the cure is great and small:
The head of the tube that comes out at its end, and it is distinguished where the bag is attached to it so that the times are different.
And the end of the tube that comes out at its bottom, and which is inserted into the buttocks, be soft  (if it is not pierced), moving forward slowly; and in one side of the loop there are two turns, and in the other side a turn, and be the width of the turn according to the thickness of the thread and larger on the smaller.
And be the bag in which are placed the medicines of animal or sheep's skin, and its root is a palm.
And be pierced with sharp turns so that it is turned over; and if the space between the turns is great, then the thickness of the thread.
And let that go into those turns with a strong thread of wool, which is to be cut into pieces, or between those turns; and adjust the bag; and when it is placed in it, let it be straight on the head of the cure between two hard constrictions, and then treat each turn: May be the quality of treating with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which is heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to be too long or too short.
And let the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs in his so that they are supported by a board or a bed sheet; and then apply the extreme end of the cure to oil or white of an egg or to a mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then let that go into the buttocks with ease, and the minister takes the bag and squeeze it with two hands and pour with haste so that it is evacuated in the budel all that is in the cure; and then remove the cure and take the patient's legs from the board.
And if the medicine forces that person to sneeze, keep as much as you can; and if it sleeps for a whole night, it is a sign of death.
May be if you cure those with medicines that are used for stomach trouble and sneezing forces those to lie down, then repeat the cure within so that it is healed.
And if in the buttocks there are painful hemorrhoids or abscesses, then it is a cure with great care and care, and those small instruments that are used to treat children.
Of treatment of wounds.
You have said in the division of treatment of wounds that it is good to use the medicine freely, and I say the same treatment for those with medicine according to the need.
I say that wounds are different according to where they are made and according to the place where they fall.
And the causes for which wounds are made are: by a sharp object, or an incision with a knife, or a blow with a lance, or an arrow, or similar to those of wounds' causes.
May be the wounds that are in the body' parts are: those on the head, or on the neck, or on the feet, or on the abdomen, or on the back, and similar to those of wounds' parts.
And I recommend the treatment of some diseases so that this reasoning and order be applied to other diseases.
And I will begin with the simple diseases of the head, since the recollection of the remedies will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Now then I say that when there is a simple disease in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from drinking water or of similar appearance, and the nose has already stopped bleeding, then you should cauterize the head immediately, and don't delay; and extract blood according to the amount of its virtue, if not at all; more so if the disease that has occurred from the plague is slight.
And cauterization of the opposite side of the infected plague; and keep the patient from eating food and drink and gross foods.
But if by moderation there is no cause to prohibit, then reduce the food and do not bring it close to meat or wine.
And pause over the plague, if to him there comes an aposteme, put a heated needle on rose oil alone or in wine in which it is stiffened.
But if you are sure that it is a case of cauterized aposteme, then pause over the plague, if it is recent let the third day pass and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply gently.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause over the scalp with oil before it is healed.
But if the plague is great or is from a cut of the spine and of similar appearance, and their lips are not tight for the children, then adjust them with this suturing according to what I recommend from the suturing of them.
But if the plague has already broken out from the bone and it is not repressed in him but only a small suspension, then cut that off and cure the disease with medicine and restore the flesh to its place instead of the nose, and order the patient to eat no food: meat and bread, and cheese, and eggs, and milk within, until he recovers.
And if the pus in the nose decomposes and does not adhere to the bone, then cut it off completely and let it dry out, and then cure it.
But if in these plagues is an artery or a vein from which blood may flow from the plague, and it is not absorbed by medicine, then inquire about the artery, and if the pus that has been cut off does not come out, then cut it again or pierce it; and if necessity forces you to do what I have said, then cauterize it before the blood is gone.
And if these diseases are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor; but apply this powder to them, since when the air has changed that, it will be solidified before.
And the way of this powder is this: take rose oil in which a single drop of dragon's blood has been dissolved, of non-extinct cause three drops; let it all be mixed and sieved, and if the plague is filled with it, and is forced by good constriction so that it clings to it, and is coagulated with the blood.
And then apply this powder to it gently and let it rest on it, and don' t remove it while it is like that, so that it does not become an aposteme, since it has not been treated with medicine before being healed.
And once only use this, when there is neither rose oil nor dragon' blood.
And this operation is made in large diseases when it is convenient to pause on them and let them be dry; and only in recent diseases, whose air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply gently.
But if the air has changed it and especially in summer, then do not apply this powder gently, but cure them with water that I have mentioned, either by applying warm oil to them or by pouring water and honey on them within; and then cure them with other treatment before they are healed.
But if you get a fracture disease in the bone, and it is small, then extract it with gentle handling.
And I will direct the treatment of fractures of the head in poison.
Of the diseases of the throat.
But if there is a disease in the throat, then do not distinguish it from the treatment of simple diseases in the head.
But if the nerves of the throat are cut or are arteries, then if it is a nerve, do not apply to it with oil that causes a violent stiffening, and apply that to it which I mentioned; that is to say, pour vinegar and milk on it, as if you were applying them to a wound, for it is like vinegar to nerves. And do not pause on the disease of any part for a long time, because the substance of the nerves is soft and the continuity of them is towards the brain, which is pus from all the members.
And if it is cured with light medicine, so that when it is washed with lukewarm water, a clear fluid appears in rose oil or not; and then dry it gently, applying oil to it.
But if the disease is great, then administer suturing or constrict the lips; and then cure it with powder before it is healed.
But if the disease is deep or there comes pus from a low place that is drowning: then pierce it in the place most affected by it.
But if there is an artery in the disease that causes blood to flow from it: then cut off or dry up that, or pierce it, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to do so with water.
But if the bones of the jaw have been cut completely and the veins of the throat are safe: then adjust the lips of the nose to it with suturing on the can of the jaw, and do not touch that; then make it even with a straight line, and let it rest on its natural figure, and then cure it with oil that causes stiffening and excitement before it is healed, and apply that to it which I mentioned; that is to say, pour oil on it that causes stiffness and excitement before it is healed, and let it dry gently.
But if the disease in the bone has been done by accident, then hit that, and if there are fragments of bones, extract all that you can; and if it is not covered with skin, let it rest before it is healed, and separate it from its shape, and make a clean cut of it.
And if the disease is recent, then apply this powder to it which I have recommended to you. But if the disease has been caused by a fistula: then cure it with water in which the recollection will come into play in the third chapter.
If it is the sound of a blade or a lance, and its depth: then consider if the patient' breath has any foul smell from him; know that the disease is deadly.
And if it is not deep and the disease is recent in the patient: then at first apply this powder to him, and don' t tighten it so that the disease does not be held up in him and return to the patient; but let him rest gently, and then apply a cool atractive poultice, and let it drape twice on a day.
And if the poultice is not yet ready, then place it in the orifice of the bladder with a wick to draw away moisture; and make the patient lie on the bladder so that the liquid runs out through his body.
But if after three days or more no spasms, tremors of the heart, or constriction come to the patient and other good signs do not appear, then you should know that the bladder is saved; then cure with water and with another treatment until it is healed.
But if the patient's recovery is slow and the opening remains open, then you should know that a fistula has formed; cure it therefore with vinegar.
And if the bladder is cut or pierced by a knife, and it is small on the surface of the foot or leg, then cure it with water that has been preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if death has already come to the bone and the pieces have separated, then place the poultice on it and draw out those pieces with a hook, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them in place until the poultice draws them out, which is a relief.
And for other accidental bladders in other members, the cure is the same as that of the one we have described.
Of bladder problems.
The discomfort that occurs in the belly can be great, little, or moderat.
A small disruption is more difficult to repair in another way, and if you do not prevent the entrance of them to their place quickly, because it is soft and thickens with the passage of time, then the instrument that enters them will be difficult to remove.
And the best disruption is moderate, because in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, and it is not difficult in the two species mentioned above.
And you should know that surgery for the belly is done in four ways; two sutures are common and are used for all other bladders of the body.
And two more specific sutures communicate with the others; however, they are specific only for the belly.
I recommend to you each explanation and description.
So I say that when the bladder is small and there is no cause of it from the intestine because of that, it is difficult to reduce it, and then it is in two ways: either by the small size of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen with cold air.
And when the water is like that, then you should know that you should cut it with a blade instead of submerging a sponge or cloth in running water alone, or taking it into cold water, and putting it on the belly while the swelling goes away.
Some bladders make the water viscous, and it is better than cold water alone in resolving swelling.
And when you see that the swelling has gone away, then you should wet the intestine with water that is high in salt and bitter, because by water it is relieved by a little cause.
But if the instrument of healing does not suffice for this treatment, then cut the disruption with a small instrument that has points where the hemorrhoids are inserted.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there is not cutting, and there is no need to remove it from its place by force.
Regarding the instrument, consider its shape:
The first cut should be sharp, and the other non-sharp, and the end should be subtle, not too much so that it is blunt, a little sharp.
And when the bladder is large and it hangs outside the body, then you should know that its reduction should be according to its natural shape, in its own place if possible on top of water, because it is better.
But when the disruption is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should place the patient on his back, and pause the soles of his feet higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the head of the patient higher than the feet.
And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your attention and consideration for a moment so that the part with the bladder is higher than the other.
And thus you should know how to administer water in large and moderate bladders.
And in small bladders, prepare the water that you have, and make it flow between your most private parts, which should hold the entire disruption with its own strength, and adjust the lips of it; and thus discover the cause of the disruption from another side.
This is the common way of suturing: one in which you take the bladder, or count the bladder according to its size; and then leave the end of the disruption of the little finger, and strengthen the bladder with a thread; or another that you do not tie to the two ends of the knot, but place the two ends of the thread at a distance from each other, so that it does not break the thread when you tie the knot; and thus you have placed two ends of the thread and made four knots.
And then reinforce the bladder with a double knot, and sometimes leave two parts together, and then add the two lips of the bladder by joining them; and then leave the thickness of the thread at one end, and make another knot there, and tie it to the first knot; and do not stop filling water if necessary on the knots before you have finished the entire construction of the bladder.
And the small threads should be between delicacy and thickness, because the thin threads cut the flesh with ease; and the thick ones are difficult to tie in a knot, so that by water they should know whether they are delicate or thick.
And you should know that the thread is tied in two ends of the knot next to each other so that the flesh is not cut with ease and the bladder remains in place before its consolidation.
And the suturing should not be prolonged so that the bladder does not remain without consolidation.
And thus you should leave the ends of the threads so that they do not come out through the hole; and place them on the expanded powder of all sides, which should hold the ends of the threads; and then you will know that the bladder has been consolidated.
And these species of suturing with threads are more convenient for small bladders, because they are enough to make the suture with one or two needles; and tie them up.
But the second suture is similar: and you should know that you administer to the four ends, from the knot and two ends of the thread, in one vein, with a needle; and wrap it up in delicacy and thickness.
And when the needle will have penetrated these four ends, then you should bring the thread to its starting point again, from the first cut; and thus that the needle does not go out through the lower side of the bladder, but goes in between the two sides of the skin; and then you should know how to make a knot with the thread so that it is secure.
And place between each stitch the quantity of the thickness of this same thread.
This stitch is used for men.
And I sewed up the wound which had been caused in a man's belly by a knife, and it was the breaking out of the greater plague from a palm; and it was found coming from the intestines through two palms of the intestine at the midsection and it was the breaking out in the midsection of the member; and then I reduced what had broken out for 22 hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and I cured it; then there came a thick fluid for a certain time, and it became fixed in its places.
And the other wounds had not been healed; and by a miracle they did not heal, because I had not cured them with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment does not heal or any medicine; but I applied a patch of cloth two days later and washed it often with milk within that day until it healed.
Then I made two kinds of stitches according to the narrative of the Parable.
And you begin to sew with the cotton thread, and you insert the needle from outside towards inside.
And so with the needle penetrating into the cotton and in that meat and according to the rule and length of all the work, and leaving the end of the thread where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle enter from outside towards inside in the other meat, according to the rule and length of the whole piece, and leave the end of the thread where you have inserted the needle.
And so when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration with the needle in that meat's end from outside towards inside; and leave the end of the thread where you have inserted the needle.
And make that penetration with your own hand; and make the needle enter into the thread in its end from outside towards inside; and leave the end of the thread where you have inserted the needle.
And then begin to sew at that meat' end and cut the thread with your own hand; and make the needle enter into the cotton from outside towards inside; and leave the end of the thread where you have inserted the needle. Then take up the thread which has been cut, and sew that end of the thread which is on the other side of the needle; and leave that end of the thread where the needle has been removed.
And make a loop and another; and make a loop with another thread within that you sew according to this example.
And the whole of this sewing method is that you sew with a thread which does not leave the skin; and you sew the cotton one loop from the end of the stitch, and you leave another loop within that you complete.
Then the second kind of stitch is called Goliah, and this is from his mouth and for his sake; it is that you sew with a thread which has medics on it, and then add to its beginning what is convenient by nature; and apply the end of one side to the other end, and so make it according to how I have told you.
Then when you have the needle in your hand at the end of the thread which is on the other side of the part where you are going to sew, and you make that penetration from outside towards inside at that end, and leave two ends of the thread; then take up the needle again and make that penetration from outside towards inside at two ends of the cotton.
Then take up those loops again, and make that penetration from inside towards outside at two ends of the thread within that you are going to sew; and it is done by making that penetration in two opposite directions of the needle's end.
This sewing method is better than the common stitching method, and it is a stitching method of which I have recalled the explanation.
This is the speech of Goliah.
And it is called the stitching of the belly, and it is done with two needles, so that you insert one into these from outside towards inside; and begin to sew with the needle which has medics on it, and make that penetration within the other meat according to the stitching of those who sew with cotton wrapped around their arms.
And you know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the belly, then the sewing of this place is more difficult than that of the other parts of the belly.
And the judgement of the medicine for a plague is different from the judgment of the other plagues.
And the cause is when you catch the plague recently after a saint dies before the air alters it; and you reduce the intestine and sew it well, then apply pouder to that with ash.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then apply ash to that with ointment which you have at hand within that it does not become hard and the threads do not break, and it is consolidated cotton and meat; and then heal it like that of the other plagues within that it is healed.
And if you do not have medicines at hand, then apply the ash for some time, since it begins to burn, and change that patch of cloth from day to day; and teach people how to make a poultice with ash within that it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in difficult situations when the plagues are simple.
And if you fear that the common plague will spread to the main members, then take care to dip wool in saturated oil, or rose water, and place it between the nips and allow them to dry.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the intestines, since it is a common occurrence; then make a black stain on that with a vi of strophic powder, and more so if the pouder has reached the intestine and caused a hole.
And you know that the one which is thick is not healing quickly compared to the one which is thin.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called gegunu does not receive the healing of the plague that enters into it from all sides; and this is due to the great multitude of veins which are in it, and its size compared with those, and its closeness to nature' nerves.
And if what you catch is the plague, and if it is recent, then reduce that according to your rule by which you reduce intestines wrapped around each other.
And if it has passed to the space and is already becoming hard or black, then tie that with a thread well on the area which is affected by that blood comes out, because in the tela there are veins and arteries.
Then cut that other piece of thread, and leave two ends of the thread dangling on the edge of the plague outside; and so you will be relieved from the attraction of that place which is affected by the plague' movement, since it is the place where the tela hangs up and the plague's breath comes out.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestines.
When a disruption occurs in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible that it will be restored to some people; because I have seen that one which was plagued in his belly with a lance' blow and it was the plague of the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and had become a fistula; and it exuded from it pus and blood, and had a fever and a wind.
Then I continued with the treatment until it was clear that the patient had not been cured, but rather that the illness had become worse; however, I continued to apply the medicine which heated and hardened the sore place.
And I put a poultice on the sore spot which had already hardened, and then I placed him in bed so that he did not move or exercise himself or drink or eat; and then I bathed his feet.
And some experienced people say that when the hernia is small, it should be treated in this way: You take a piece of cloth from a large cap; and then you tighten the two sides of the hernia and place one end of the cloth between them; then, when you pull the cloth over those ends, cut off the top of the cloth; for it will stick and not come apart.
And then place another poultice next to the first one; and do not stop making poultices until all the hernia has gone.
And then cut off that piece; and sew up the hernia; and once the hernia has healed, it will not come back again; and you will not harm the patient.
And it is possible that the hernia can be cut with a very fine needle; and if you take the end of such a hernia thread and it is thin, then tie off one end of the thread to the end of another thread, wrapped up, and then insert that other end of the thread into the needle and sew up the hernia; and reduce the hernia.
This method of sewing with poultices is just another way of confidence and hope.
But if the hernia is large and wide, as it often is in the thin abdomen; because then only there can be a reduction, but not a cure of all.
Of treatment for the hernia and fistula.
Do you know that any swelling or abscess that does not heal and hardens, becoming a chronic ulcer, which does not close up; that is called a fistula in general; and we call it the hernia ulcus.
A fistula, according to its true nature, is a chronic, persistent, painful condition that is deep and hollow; it is white and has no pain when touched; for this reason, it is called "rizatus", that is, painful.
It is in men who are moist; and the moisture hardens rapidly. Some times this moisture becomes thick, and then it is little and coarse.
I have already described all these causes, and I will now explain the treatment of ulcers with medicines in another section.
And this is how, by means of surgery, I will treat the fistula which has been caused by an operation.
Do you know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because they can affect veins, arteries, nerves, intestines, the bladder, or any of the other organs, or even the joints made up of several bones; and from those to those nearby, such as those next to the main bones of the trunk, or those near the limbs.
And among these fistulas, those that are caused by bad blood, difficult to heal, and which do not respond well to treatment, or to the occupation of the affected person, are a great source of worry and ignorance.
If the depth of such a fistula does not reach these locations which I have mentioned; and if you trust in its treatment and want to learn more about it, then try to make an incision or pierce it, and if the fistula follows the natural path, and you inquire carefully about it.
But if the fistula is very twisted; then investigate it with a very fine needle, because air rises and bends when it comes into contact with the spine of the trunk.
And if the fistula is not too serious; you will not be able to treat it yourself.
Then seal the opening with a bit of thread; because the moisture with which you have lubricated that opening will also run to the other openings and go out.
Then inquire carefully, according to the methods which you have learned; because it is possible that there are bones or nerves underneath; and that fistula goes far away from or near to them; and if it only has small openings and is not too large; then measure carefully with your finger, and consider the causes and accidents of ulcers.
And when you have considered all these causes at length; then go on to the treatment according to confidence: and I will tell you now if it is a fistula which appears near a wound or an ulcer, far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the locations which I have mentioned.
Then dry up that fistula according to what has been said about its cause; and then apply medicine to treat the sore place which needs healing.
But if the fistula is very deep; and it follows the natural path, then cut it off as much as you can; and then remove all the corrupted flesh from it; and then apply sharp medicines wrapped in bandages; and put those medicines into the cavity of the fistula, which you have cleaned out with a knife.
And make a mixture of those medicines and put it into the opening of the fistula from which the corruption has been removed by means of the sharp knife.
Then restore that opening with bandages and apply wetting substances to promote healing.
But if it is not healed by water; then you must cut off those parts which do not heal.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone; and you must be careful to treat that bone according to what I have said about it; or if it is due to a nerve or one of the main bones, as I have described in another section.
But if the bone is discovered and it is in corruption and blackness; then cut off all that part where the corruption is; and then treat that sore place with water so that it heals.
And if it is not healed and the stench is very bad; then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then discover carefully and thoroughly the cause of it, and clean it out entirely with a strong, sharp knife; and then restore it.
Here is the translation of the text into English:
If the bone is slightly corrupted, or if it is possible to reach it, then you can use small, delicate forceps to remove it.
And if there are any bones left, then carefully extract them all, leaving none behind for any cause due to your strength.
But if there is any cause of humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or mistake, then incise those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and set free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to place the bones in position at this time, then pause on the gore that you might find the gore, and leave that gore within which there is flesh and ligaments, and keep the gore that is not consolidated, and the incision that you have made in your operation.
Then, if you are afraid, pause on the foot submerged in three times oil, or a submerged coto in Egyptian ointment, or in any of the green ointments, for when those ligaments are removed, and the bones are separated from their adhesion, and from that attraction they are relieved.
But if it is a large bone, such as the tibia or fibula or similar to those, and that which is corrupted is only the face of it, then cut off that part only behind the part that can be ostited, that blackness and corruption, and restore the gore.
But if that which is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that part and incise it all within the place where the corruption has entered, and then treat it within that it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you consult with a man in your business so that he pauses on it and serves as an assistant to your operation.
A young man of about 30 years old, who feels pain in his testicles, and small pieces come out from within the body towards the scrotum, but the matter is not delivered to the scrotum, it is matter of pus with great pus, and he does not have an external cause.
And then I extended the time for it through the mistake of the doctors until the pus became more abundant, and the matter moved, and his cure was postponed until the leg became swollen, and it had orifices everywhere from which he bled and there were the moisture of the body.
And then many doctors treated him for two years, but he was not cured in that place because I was called.
And I saw the leg of him and the matter that ran from those orifices for a great distance; and his whole body was swollen, and the color of it was yellow.
And then I intervened in one of those orifices and reached the bone.
And then I examined the orifices closely, and I found all the parts of the leg coming from them.
And then I hid myself and incised one of the orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, and I removed that which was corrupted, and it was dry and corrupted and disintegrated; and a part of the leg had already fallen into the pelvis where it had penetrated within the pelvis.
And then I tightened that which I had discovered and prepared the bone that was found.
And I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had cut and tightened, and I had already removed it.
Then I resumed the restoration of the gore with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I continued to examine the bone again from the first discovery, and I discovered continuous corruption with the bone.
And then I tightened that which appeared to me of that corruption, and then I made an incision for the cure of it, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered another vein and did not stop incising the bone little by little particularly and piercing the cure of it, and it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and I extracted the marrow of it, and then I treated it with medicine, and it was consolidated a little and was cured.
And there is no need for an iteration in his operation or incision because of the convenience of his health and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, since he feels it all day long due to excessive diarrhea that causes fainting.
And then he was healed completely, and there is nothing wrong with the hard flesh of his body; his virtues were restored in their places, and he returned to his former habits, and did not cause any contrary things in walking or anything else for any reason.
But if the bone is prominent in a place on the body, then cover that with a cloth and secure it in its position, and order someone to stretch that bone; and cut that bone with a sharp knife from the first cut; and then lay that bone on the flesh that is next to it, and stretch the end of it so that you do not harm the flesh.
Then place a bench or table from the side of the bone carefully, for when you make the cut, it is not prohibited to chop off the corrupted flesh.
Then cover the cutting with another cut on the other side little by little, since if it is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces the locking of it on the other side again.
But if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then advance one part continuously towards the other, and the corruption is at your location or in another part, then you discover all the flesh; and then place it from the side, and then cut that bone where the corruption is located so that it is continuous with the locking of the other part.
And be the cutting according to the location of the corruption little by little, as we have said.
But if the corruption is in the joint, then incise that corrupt joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other part.
But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but in another place.
But if the corruption is in the chest of the neck or the head, it is difficult; however, if you discover what type of corruption appears to you and cut it, and make it according to each possibility that can be made, and at any time it does not cause any contrary thing for blood vessels or nerves.
And you know what is the most suitable place and the most appropriate tools for this operation; because all the bones have different characteristics regarding their location, preparation, size, subtlety, thickness, rarity, and hardness; so prepare any operation with specialized instruments for that operation.
And you know that this operation requires specific tools; because you have long and thoughtful study of the techniques of this art, and witnesses to the consequences of mistakes, since you have already made many mistakes with these instruments for any purpose.
And I will show you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you should use as simple ones, with which you will process your prohibition, which you will experience on other people. Form of cutting:
Other form of cutting:
Other large form of cutting:
Form of sawing: The head of this saw according to the shape of a star-shaped claw, and the points of it are according to the shape of the points of an augur.
And it does not work unless we cut off the ends of the joints when they are rotten, or make the mouth wide open.
Form of smaller razors:
Form of thin razors:
Other nicely made saw: let it be made round above and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of a small dagger nicely made. Form of it:
Form of razors in which there is a concave:
Other subtle form of razors:
Form of other curved razors:
Form of small razors resembling a tent:
Other smaller form of incisor:
Form of another incisor; this one resembling a saw, and the end of it is like a claw, and is displayed in a place where the bones are split:
Form of saw that also serves to cut through the bones:
And its end is triangular and has an acute point.
It is made of Indian steel, and its appearance is similar to all the causes that we have talked about of razors, and incisers, and saws.
Of incision extremities and the locking of the bones.
The extremities can be treated or by internal cause or external cause, or as you have cured that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which has no impact on any cause, then you cut off that member within this water that causes death or evil which is a greater removal of the member.
And the sign of that person who has occurred, is that the member is made black within that it is burned that it burns, or you wash it off towards the darkness within that the discoloration that has occurred within that member which takes all the body; and therefore, if you cut off that member.
And in a similar way, if it is the cause of the corruption from some poisonous causes then as well from scorpion mare or of a bat or of a rat and in a similar way.
And if the corruption or injury is on the end of it, then you cut off that part and do not give space for the corruption to spread further into the body.
And if it occurs to the whole body, then you cut off that part from the joint of the arm, and do not give space for the corruption to spread further into the arm.
And if instead of it, you cut off the arm at the shoulder joint.
And if the corruption occurs in another part of the body, then that is the death of the patient; and other causes are added to this cure with a certain amount of virtue.
And if corruption occurs in one foot instead of the other, then you cut off that foot within one of the joints.
And if it is in the heel of the foot, then you cut off all the foot. Or if it is in the arch, then you cut off the arch within the joint of the arch.
And if the corruption has already occurred on the heel, then there is only one remedy, and that is to cut off the patient's heel.
And the way of cutting off a member or sawing it is that you strengthen the joint in the place where you want to cut, and strengthen another joint over the spot, and extend the minister one joint to the spots below, and extend the other joint on them; and you separate the flesh which is between two joints, and cut it open completely; and that has been cut or sawed.
And as long as it is not placed with a strap over all the joints in order that they do not touch the spot, and that it causes the patient's injury to be adjusted and an apoplexy to occur.
Or if it occurs to a person' work, then you cauterize the spot with great care, or pour on some powder that restricts the blood; and then return to your medicine until it is completed.
And then cut off the member that has been troubled with a strong joint in a convenient place, and cure that within which has been healed.
I will recommend to you that you go to a man in the service of a fire, this accident which I have told you about, which was brought together by a fire.
And that corruption occurred first in his foot within that it bends all the foot.
And then that man prepared himself for this purpose more than he could bear the cure to go to the member with great haste because of his pain and his suffering, and burned that foot within the joint, and healed it.
Long time occurred to him that corruption in the arm of the body which he was holding.
And then I went to him, and so he pierced me deeply with that thought above the body's medicine, with the purification of his soul; and that thought did not cause a response and I began to feel it in his other foot within the body.
And he appealed to me to cut off his body, and I did not want to cause a response from that thought above, and more than that, I should die the body of him with the cutting off of it, because the virtue of the patient was on the edge of death.
And then that man died from me, and returned to his land, and he who had prepared himself came to me with his whole arm, and it was healed.
And I will not add to this narrative unless it is to be an aid to me in dealing with this evil, and that you understand by which means it was accomplished and by which means it should be reversed.
Of cure of the sick and the quality of the preparation with medicines.
When an apoplexy occurs in large members of the body and the space of the apoplexy is prolonged within that it causes a collection of blood, then it is cut open and pierced, and it is washed out by water, and the wound is sewed up on both sides as if it were a boat, and the knot is opened where it has been sewed; and it does not cause a second apoplexy to occur in the bone or in the nerves or in the joint, it is called a vein, and is not named a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged within that it causes corruption to occur in another member, then it is called a fistula, and not a lump of blood.
And the cure of it is that you cut off all that wound completely at first, and more so when it is softened and made with a cloth, and confirmed that it does not stick to the spot because of its corruption.
Or if you hope that the wound will adhere and that that corruption has not occurred through a second cause, then in the wound have placed a cloth, and cure it with a strong medicine.
And that is what you consider the wound, and if it is large, then the arm that has caused an odor, then clisterize it with a medicine of Egypt made of oil and vinegar and honey receiving parts in equal parts, and put them in a boat, and cut them open on both sides as if it were a vessel, and let them flow over a fire until the medicine is boiled and comes out from the inside.
And you take from him the water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey; and you cleanse his stomach, and strengthen his orifices, and leave the medicine in him for the quantity of two hours.
And you extract that with sacrifice; and make water for as many days as it purifies the stomach and restores the fluids.
And some are cleansed with ash water, if not this medicine is taken by you; and that you take the ash of oak, and put it on the water; and you mix it well, and cleanse it inside him, so that you swear that his stomach will be held back.
And if the patient does not have tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then cleanse it with honey and water mixed with three parts of zinnia, and cleanse it with honey and wine mixed, because honey has the property of purifying and washing, and wine attaches to the stomach, and more so when there is a surplus of tightness and dryness.
And when you have made water a few times and are convinced that the stomach has been restored, then cleanse it with water in which meat is boiled.
And you take from the oil of daphnes and dissolve it with rose water and wine for stiffness; or you cleanse it with some medicines, and apply oil that has these properties, which I have already written in the treatise on the oils.
And if the orifices of the stomach are narrow in which the tube of the enema cannot be received, then you enlarge them little by little, and pause with five envelopes of Egyptian oil or oil of basil, so that they are enlarged.
And apparently if the orifices are wide, then you join the lips of him with sutures and leave its quantity in which there is addition between the enemas.
And if the orifice from which the brachium comes out is elevated to the back of the neck, then you dry it in a place where the brachium runs inside, because when the brachium is constricted in the depth of the stomach, the meat remains in it.
And if you cannot dry the stomach within the area of the neck as much as you want, then you pierce it so that you prepare the member for its movement according to what is appropriate for your clothing and not retain any reason for the brachium.
And you remove what is on the orifice of the stomach, which restores itself in a full hour so that it comes out water that is adjusted for the brachium. And so that you know if the water that runs from the brachium is more or less, or whether it is digested or not.
And you consider the location of that stomach, if there is pain in it from the patient and whether it is in a swelling.
And when your medicine has been prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is attached to the orifice of the stomach has become adherent, or has acquired adhesion, then the first day you remove it, and when you remove the poultice, change the drape for another, and renew the oil.
May if from the stomach comes a small space of subtle virus, then do not despair of the adhesion of linen, because the cure of it is acquired, for some people in whom it takes a long time for the flesh in the poultices to become pus, and for those who have it made pus in the opposite way.
And if from the stomach comes three days of digestive brachium, then you know that the stomach does not adhere; and if the adherence of the stomach is prolonged and the cause is a long time, then you adjust the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried in this way with oil of daphnes, when it is in an adjusted state of addition of salt.
And the next one is that you take from oil of daphnes and dissolve it in rose water, and it is in a dry state in olive oil, and you join it with wine of oak in its substance, and use it; and apply it.
And that is similar in this action, when there is no brachium, oil of daphnes, honey when it is cooked inside that it becomes thick, and use it; or you take myrrh and aloe and blend it, and sift all of it and powder over the honey when it is on the fire, and you line up water over a drape and strengthen it; and you line up that honey that you have cooked, and you sift it onto linen.
And some are given long-acting aromatic oil, and sliced flowers of celestial lily (and it is a celestial lily) and flour of ergot and centaury, and use those simple ones or adjust them, blend those and sift them and powder over the honey that I have mentioned; and keep it.
And if the stomach is prolonged and has not been healed with this cure, then you know that corruption is in its beginning, and has already begun in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; then you treat it with a surgical incision, as much above as below.
Of surgery of rubbed bread and nails and incision of finger added and section.
Of surgery of bread and nails rubbed together and an incision of the finger added and sectioned off. And when it is prolonged and its cure is delayed, it is a painful pustule; or it is a pus in pus, or it is corrupted, and it corrodes the nail; and firmly corrupts that whole, and darkens its color.
And therefore when you have that water that I have mentioned in the division and do not trust your cure, then you cut off all the excess that is rust of the nail, and you cauterize the poultice with fire, because cauterizing mot is beneficial in this case.
And if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are already compromising the flesh to the ends inside, and it begins to throb and to leak, then you pause a little subtle pain in that angle of the nail that you poke the flesh, and you push it up; and you pause that flesh on fire with corrosive enemas until it is all restored. And then treat it with oil within.
And if corruption has already set in the bone, then you cut out that bone and extract it, because there is no time for healing when the bone has rotted.
And if corruption and腐敗 go together in the same finger, then you cut it off at a joint according to what is appropriate for its remembrance, and then treat it within.
And if there is a percussion or a hit on the nail, and that pain is severe, then at the beginning you bleed the patient, and you cut off the nail with a transverse section through it from above, and be careful that the section does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, because you would provoke painful birth to excessive blood in that place and cause a birth of flesh appropriate for the site; and then treat that spot with water that causes pain.
May's weight is adjusted, which is born on the back of some men, very strong is the flesh, and very strong is in his bones, or very strong is in his nails.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of those said. But may who is born in some nuts of this said does not harm, and this one who is born at the joints very strong is deformed.
And of those who are born carnose, the section is a bit difficult, and it is that you should cut this one with a sharp blade at its root.
But may who is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore you must guard against the absence of it.
But may who is born in the said nuts, cover that you cut at the beginning the flesh of it with a round blade on the bone, and immediately tighten with one of those saws suitable for water, and then heal it inside so that it should be healed.
The consolidation that happens to those mentioned between them visible motas or by the birth of the man who gives it in any way, or by the consolidation of plague or by fire, or by resemblance, so that you dry up that consolidation until those mentioned return to their natural form.
Then return between their drapes of which you infused it in rose oil so that they are not consolidated too much, and separate between them, or return between those a thin leaf of lead until it is consolidated according to how long.
And if consolidation happens in some mentioned at the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapt it to the figure of the member.
Of cutting with knives, so are varicose veins.
Vices so are varicose veins, and those are thick veins filled with excess melancholic fluid that comes in motz of the members of the body, and most appear in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Then you administer a purge of black cholera from time to time by strong expulsion, and then let the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
May's cure of them is according to two ways: the one is that it be cut and be pulled out that black knot, and another way is that the vein is lifted and all be extracted.
The section of it is according to this way: dip the leg at the beginning to a tail-like shape within that black knot be resolved, which is curly from the leg, and then tighten the leg of the patient under the kowsh that is made with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three by wide section, and then lift up the black knot to the hand of the patient at the end of his legs within its, and later on the outside, within that from the knot be discharged the quantity that you want and which times can be extracted, and that bears the virtue of the leg.
Then return it, and order him to abstain from the foods that produce black cholera.
Then repeat the cure by phlebotomy when veins are filled with blood, and it is given to the patient.
May's elevation of them is according to this way: you cut the leg of the patient, if it has hair on it, and then put it into a bath, and dip the leg in water until it hardens and veins are swollen; or that exercise be made by strong movement, if bath is not to your hand, within that member be scratched.
Then return the vein to its right place by section in the long or in the back of it, you cut it from the front, or you cut it from the bottom, or you cut it from the top.
Then return the vein with nails and extract the vein from all parts until it appears on the surface, and this is the appearance of it that sometimes declines to blackness.
And therefore when you extract it, and from the leg there comes out a white thread that is not cut.
Then return it under that line within that be lifted and be taken away from the vein, and suspend it with an onion or lion's tooth.
Then return another section near that section by three fingers, and then extract the vein from the end of it within that appears.
Then return that one and cut it at the back section of it, you extract it from the end of it within that appears. Then extract that one from the section that is above that one, and then extract it that appears from the second section.
Then return it within that you extract that one from the section that is most superior or most distant of all sections, within that all is extracted; and then cut it.
And if you do not obey me to extract and raise it, then insert an needle with a strong double thread and tie that one, or insert between it and return your hand to all parts within that is lifted. And guard that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it is difficult to you to raise that leg and it has come back on the patient by that wound.
Then when all that is taken out, then return to the place of the plague that is submerged in vinegar and oil red and oil not-red, and heal it within that is healed.
And if the wine is contracted without tortuosity that is wrapped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what you said, then return it to its right place. Then cut it at all parts of tortuosity of it and the places where it is wrapped, and then suspend that one with nails within that you lift that one completely.
And guard that you do not cut the vein and do not wound that one, for it is difficult to you to raise that leg; and serve your prudence in that one.
Shape of the section that is dried with oil:
It is not on the leg that you extract it with nails or with an acute point, and it is not of a sharp extremities so that it does not wound the vein; and it is of thick flexibility like lion' tooth, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein because of its subtility; but it has this superfluous thickness.
Of extraction of leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in the tail-like shape so that it is not on the leg when it is cut with a blade.
It is very strong generated in other parts of the body than legs.
The creation of it is the decomposition that comes from the inside of the body when snakes and worms and scabies and worms are generated between the leg and the flesh.
The sign of the arrival of it is this vein that happens in a burning inflammation; and then that place is swollen; and then the vein appears from the swollen place like a root of a plant.
And then, when you take the end of it out, wrap that piece of lead which is the weight of a dragon around it; and if there are two dragons, leave the lead suspended from the chest.
And as often as he has any cause to go outside, wrap him in lead and notice that. And if it is prolonged, then you cut a hole in the leg and wrap it gently; and do not cut that part that is outside until it has been cut inside, for if you cut that part it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause a bad blister and ulcer in the place and ulceration.
So that it is treated gently and extracted little by little, until it has been extracted completely from the back of the leg and does not cause any cause in the body.
And from this vein it is drawn from about twenty men who are in their length of five palms and of ten fingers, and I have already come to me that I draw one of 20 palms.
And if it is cut at the time of its medicine, then insert a sharp instrument into the hole in the leg and pierce that with a long incision through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the place for several days with medicines; and then cure that with the cure of blisters.
And this vein sometimes has a ramp, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes out of it some orifices, and is drawn from each orifice.
And therefore cure that there as we have said above in the division and at the water that is above said.
Of section on the worms that are born under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This malady is called in some countries bovine disease because it appears suddenly on the animals and is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes into all the body blowing and breaking down, and shows itself at the surface of the animal with pain in the members until it breaks the skin and comes out.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors so that when this happens worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms come out from the abdomen.
And it is feared because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and has reached the neck, then it breaks it strongly and destroys the neck, and where it is there are some seen.
And therefore when you want to treat that one and extract it, then do not do so unless you have walked with it and noticed its behavior, and then cover that you put over it and hold it tightly and strongly, and then dry it on it and extract it.
And if it is submerged in the flesh and you do not see it, then you make a cautery with fire on the place where it lives, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it as we have said above.
Maybe if you see that it has reached the neck of the animal, then hold it tightly above the eye with a strong grip, and then dry it on it, and extract it; and let the patient use medication to remove corrupted humors from his body, and protect himself from causing putrefaction.
Of section on the disease of the horse.
This malady is called in our country nafir, and it is a painful disease that affects some members, and then changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second time as I recommended to you. You were called to a female patient in a village, and I saw her arms, and discovered a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and because it was getting worse for an hour, I saw that swelling go away as if it were silver that is running from one place to another.
And then she sat down in the pain of that place and held it there for an hour.
And then he corrects in the other side as if it reaches to the other arm.
And then I told him that I would turn it around all over its body, as I saw; and I was greatly amazed at the change of it and at the speed from one member to another. And I have already seen those things in front of me in the same way, but I have never seen such things that are changed from one member to another as this time. But I did not see them like this with my eyes when the woman was there.
And you did not think that it was water, but by water because the woman was young, where there are short bodies and open veins, and in this appearance the wind changed as we have said above.
And it is necessary that you do not appear in this way of reversal of good people and dry bodies with veined legs.
And if you want to heal it, and the patient feels pain, then do not appear to it without walking as we have said above, then hold it tightly and dry it on it within that is removed, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see them with your own eyes, then heal it with the extraction of the body and with water that you expel wind, and digest those pills that are foul-smelling and those that resemble resin.
Of extraction of arrows.
Arrows are different depending on their types, and according to the places of the bodies in which they rest, because their difference is that some have large tips, and small ones, and concave ones, and flat ones, they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues.
And of the signs of danger in the neck is when the arrow hits the bone, and it goes through it, and is drawn from the nape which is over the neck because this happens with violent pain, and dizziness, and rustling in the veins, and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and vomiting of colera, and it is torn strongly and the word is destroyed, and it is drawn from the place of the plague with white humidity resembling sweat, and it has a similar taste to bone-eating.
And therefore if these signs appear in you, then you abstain from healing and extracting the arrow, unless it is outside.
But the signs of the arrow in the heart are that it is near the left armpit, and you feel a pain when it hits something hard, and does not show anything; and strongly moving the arrow seems like pulsing of the wrist, and black plague spreads, and tightens that part, and makes it tickle, and fainting, and syncope, and then you know that death comes.
And when the arrow has struck the chest, there comes forth a frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the throat are closed up, and the color of the patient changes, and great breath is drawn in and out, and he craves air to breathe.
And if the arrow hits the veil that is on the foot, and the pain suddenly becomes more intense near the small ribs, then great sharp pain and loud sighing occurs, and all the limbs of the body are affected.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, then a strong pain comes from the digestive tract.
And if the arrow hits the belly and gets stuck in it, then a rupture of the bowel or intestine occurs, or a hernia, and there is no hope for recovery from the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine is passed out quickly, and some matter comes out with it, and there is great pain on the patient's back, then know that it is a fatal wound.
And may the other limbs not be affected as well: the face, the neck, the jaw, the spine, and the back; also the shoulders, sides, and chest - and all their joints - are saved according to the greater dispositions, when the arrow does not strike a vein or an artery, and is not a poisonous one.
And I recommend to you that one must be careful about the nature of these arrows, so that you can know how to treat them properly.
Which cause is this: because in a man an arrow hits the lacrimal duct of his eye at the base of his nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side, cut off his ears, and healed him, and there was no wound in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which hit him in the side of his eye, cut off his eyelids, and the arrow had already been hidden; it was not a sharp arrow of the Turks, but it had a lion's head at its tip- and there were no ears.
And that man is the Jew, and there was no bad accident in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had hit his jaw; it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with ears; then I cut off those two guide-bits, and it was already submerged in his jaw; then I carefully extracted it, and healed the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had hit his stomach; I thought he would die from it, and so, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I carefully extracted the arrow and healed him, and there was no bad accident.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had hit the small of his back, and the plague was consolidated on him; then a fire started and burned him to death, and the arrow was lodged in his crotch.
And I saw a woman whom an arrow had hit in her stomach, and the plague was consolidated inside her, and it did not change her natural dispositions in anything, and the woman did not suffer any harm in some of her natural functions.
And I saw another man whom an arrow had hit in the face, and the plague was consolidated and broke out; there was no harm to him, but he looked strange.
And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king which had hit his nose; it had already fallen to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to treat him for the extraction of the arrow within three days.
And then I turned the arrow over with a delicate touch; and then I felt that there was no point at all on the right side of his ear, and so I discovered that the tip of the arrow was touching it.
And I applied an ointment to the place with a beneficial and digestive action, confining it so that the place would appear to me as the location of the arrow, so that it will heal on top of it.
And there was no bad accident in that place where the arrow had hit it; and I continued to apply the ointment to that place for several days, and the plague consolidated itself while I did so, and on another day the arrow broke out of his nose, and I discovered it in front of me.
And then I applied to the plague an acute corrosive medicine for several days, until a fire started; and then I tasted it, and I discovered the tip of the arrow, which had attached itself to the shaft.
And then I adjusted the medicine in accordance with the appearance of the plague; and soon after that, I saw clearly the tip of the arrow, and it passed before me for a space of time, four months later.
And then the plague became more intense, and I approached it with scissors, and again with them, and at last, on the day of judgment, I extracted it; and thus I restored that plague.
And some doctors argued that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it; and then the plague was consolidated, and healed completely, without any harm to him in any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you can regulate and interpret them properly; for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by me, since they are not described in the book.
And the artisan is skilled in a little; and on what happens here, he knows what happens elsewhere; and he performs novel operations and uses new instruments to descend into the causes of things that happen here.
And then I say that arrows are not shot from the limbs, but are hit in two ways: either because of attraction to the place where they strike; or because of repulsion from the opposite side.
And that which is shot from the body's end is an arrow; or it proceeds from a carnivorous part, and is shot and is an arrow outside of the body.
And if you do not obey immediately when it strikes, then know that you will die within three days; for you must find the meat which is around it, and the attraction of it and its exit are far from it.
And if it is hit in the bones and you do not obey immediately when it strikes, then leave it for a few days; and every day return to that place with attraction and moisture, and it will be shot from your body.
And if you do not obey immediately when it strikes within a few days; then know that you will penetrate the course of the arrow in that bone from all directions with a subtle force until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
May be if the arrow is already stuck in the body and is stuck by the feeling, then you ask whether there is pain, and if you feel it, then draw it with sharp instruments that are suitable for drawing it.
And if you cannot draw it on the skin because of the contraction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then you must draw the skin so that it is expanded and the arrow can be extracted.
And if there is hair attached to it which has been caught, then you cut the flesh in which it is caught completely, and try to draw it out; and devise how to do this, because you cannot do it on the skin in the fracture of the ears and in the twisting of that part inside until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from any place where it is, then you use a twisting motion of your hand with forceps at all turns until it obeeys; and be careful in the last turn that the arrow does not break and that it is extracted by your difficult grip on it and on its extraction.
And if you cannot extract it with your hand, then leave it for a few days until the turns heal which are in its course, and then repeat what we have said so that it is relieved. May be if you feel pain in your feet when walking, then administer to yourself the water we have said to cure this in its chapter.
And preserve your virtue from the incision of veins or nerves, or of strings, and administer to yourself with all possible ease and quietness and delay and firmness as we have said, and recommend it to yourself and to me.
And therefore you should reverse the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which the place of the arrow in him, for it is more convenient. May be if this is not possible for you, then administer water that is possible for you by figures.
May be if the arrows that come out from opposite parts or if you have already caused some pain in them by pressure, and if the tip of the arrow protrudes a little above the skin near the part where it is stuck, then cut it off; and do this according to the quantity in which the forceps hold it; and then throw it away, because it is done lightly without difficulty.
May be if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand according to the pain until the arrow presses against the bone, and make it bigger, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat what we have said until it is extracted by fire.
And if the tip of the arrow is in that part, then you push it with your hand.
May be if the tip is caught and you want to administer an impact, then insert it, if it is silent, sharp instrument that catches between its concave part and the shaft of the arrow, and then push it with your hand.
May be if the arrow is concave, then push it with a sharp instrument that enters into it, because the arrow is relieved by it.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then cut off all the flesh in which it is, if you can do this with water, and then cure it with that water with which you think it convenient.
And if the arrow has entered the foot or the belly or the bladder or the ribs, and it is close to touching the skin so that you can touch it with your hand, then cut it off from the skin, and if it hurts you, then extract it, and then wipe it clean; and cure that part within which it is until it is healed.
Shape of forceps for throwing arrows:
When their limbs are caught on the hook, hold them firmly with a sharp serrated blade so they don't slip off.
And there are special darts made, large, small and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and the slenderness thereof, and the breadth of the plate, and the constraint thereof.
with a point like this, so that the instrument is relieved in it, and is driven from this;
of phlebotomy of veins.
The veins of phlebotomy from which one usually draws blood are: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20 of which one draws blood in the head. These are the pulsating veins which run along the ears, they are called auricular veins; two herbs that grow in the temple; and two veins that run in the two eyelids of the eyes, these are called lacrimal veins; and the vein that is placed at the center of the forehead, and the vein that runs at the end of the nose; and two jugular veins that run along the neck; and two veins that run on the lips, and two veins that run under the lips, and - these are the veins that are called algidal -; and there are two veins that run on the tongue. There are the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20 is a cephalic vein and it should be the wild one; and the people calls it "head vein", and a sore, and is a migrain vein, and consists of a ram of the basilica, and another ram of the cephalic; and this is called by the people "vein of all the body", and the basilica is a vein which is stopped in the domestic lat, and it is called "citillar", and they call that one the common ones "vein of the belly"; and it runs from the arm, and is stopped on the fire, and this is the one that is phlebotomized, and this is the one that appears clearly upon the appearance; and a salve, and is a vein which runs between the said auricular and another little one, and has two branches.
And in the foot and in the back are three veins; the first of these is that which is to the left of the curvature of the neck of the wild lat; and the second is a sciatic vein, and its place is to the left of the back of the domestic lat; and the sciatic vein, and its place is to the left of the back of the wild lat; and in the back there are other veins similar to those.
The healing of the veins which run along the ears is by little catarrh, emaciation and sore-headedness of old age.
And the quality of drawing those veins depends on this: it is that the head of the patient be rashed, and rubbed in the occipitus in the place of both of these veins be rubbed with a broad cloth; and tighten the patient's head by a bandage so that they appear at their ends at the sides of the head below the ears; and draw them with the thread and if you feel the pulse of those on the thread, here there is no doubt.
Then you take the blade of a knife, and that one is sharp, and then insert it in the vein within the socket until phlebotomy reaches the bone. And you raise your hand towards the vein and the socket at its top, and cut the vein with a sharp cutting. And this length of the cut is the quantity of two diz that are measured or counted from it; and make a hole with a needle as many times as you wish.
Then tighten it with the pulley and let go that which is healed.
And this has already been done in the beginning of the book, the cutting of those and their cauterization.
There are the two arterial veins that run in the temple, the healing of phlebotomy is by old age, and by evil diseases, frequent headaches, and sharp flowing blood into the eyelids.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those depends on this: it is that you tighten the patient' head by a bandage so that the two veins appear clearly in front of your eyes through the appearance, and then feel their pulse from the thread; and then you try to see.
Then you raise the socket of the vein and the top at its ends with the needle, and cut it inside; and raise it towards its top; and then cut those other two veins; and make the cut according to your need.
Then remove the bandage from the patient' head, and pause the thread on the vein for an hour; then put the hand over that one, and tighten it with a pulley and a strong grip, and let go that which is healed.
And this has already been done in the beginning of the book, their recall, and their cutting; and their cauterization.
Thus, the healing of phlebotomy of the forehead vein is by old age and diseases of the face, emaciation, sore-headedness, and foul-smelling headaches.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to my recommendation; if you tighten the patient' head by a bandage so that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a blade, and this is the form of it:
Then pause the point which is prominent on the head of the blade over that vein, and strike it with a light or another cause in a manner such as this, and let go the blood to flow according to the quantity that you wish; then remove the bandage from the patient' head, and tighten it with a pulley so that it is healed.
Some veins are easier to phlebotomize by a needle, however, it is not necessary to say that phlebotomy is of acute extremities as with the other phlebotomies, before its extremities, and phlebotomy of those according to the transverse, because the bone is strong and hard; and a needle would break in it if phlebotomy were made by it.
There is the healing of the two veins that run along the eyelids of the eyes through the heat of the eye, and by emaciation and sore-headedness on the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you tighten the patient' head by a bandage, and then draw those veins, and you stand on the top of their heads.
And it is done according to the transverse at a short length, because in this place there is no flesh; and if phlebotomy is subtle, then its extremity is broken by a strong hand.
Then make the blood flow as many times as you wish; then put your hand on those veins, and tighten them with a pull; then let go those veins.
There is the healing of the nose vein by acute fever and violent headaches, and by emaciation and sore-headedness on the face, and especially when it is old age.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that you tighten the patient' head by a bandage, and then draw his left side towards you, and make a subtle cut long, and place that one in its middle location on the top of the nose according to the line; because the vein does not appear in front here, and because the blood begins to flow soon after.
Now that you have finished making the small incisions and letting blood as needed, then bring those together again by tying them with a new knot because they are restored slightly.
The relief of the bloodletting of two veins should be by contraction and beginning of leprosy and evil motes, and painful and corrosive ulcers as well as with blistering.
And the quality of this bloodletting on those is that the patient should be tied up each one with a string and be placed on his back; and the healer be over the head of the patient, and the patient be lying on a couch.
Then let blood from the vein with wide-spread and small incisions as needed, then bring those together again by tying them with a certain quantity of blood or according to the amount of times that it needs to be bled; and then do the same with the other vein.
Then remove the ligature and tighten the two veins a little in order that the patient does not choke, and let him lie down as the plague is healed.
And the relief of bloodletting on those veins that are infected, and it brings small pustules and ulcers on the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the passageway of breath.
And the quality of this bloodletting on those is that you make a cut in front of your own body, and tighten the neck with a bandage, and roll the lips of him and look at two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the second one on the left; and the indication of each one is according to its darkness, and this is more because in the passageway of those there are small black veins; and then cut each one by a separate incision.
Then if there is doubt, you leave them and do not know which one of those is, then go to the incision of the larger of those, and from the pustule that appears on those.
And do the same with the two veins that are in the lips of him.
Then of the two veins that are on the tongue, the relief by bloodletting from the head is when it is choked up to a certain extent because it is in the throat, and the evil of the uvula, and the evils of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting on those is that you bring the patient between your two hands in front of the sun, and raise his tongue, and look at the sides of the tongue, from one side it is thick and from the other thin, and the color of each one is turning to black.
Then bleed each one; and be careful not to finish making the incisions on those, because those are arteries.
And your veins that have been bloodletting in the groin are in those veins from which it is customarily made according to two ways, or they put on it a wide blade or a knife of sharpness, or they cut with a surgical knife, and then if there is no response, this is its way:
is that it is made according to the times, and leads to opening concave veins that are full of blood, and those that contain thick blood.
is of small width and very subtle end, and leads to bloodletting on veins that contain subtle citron-colored blood.
Then the relief of bloodletting on the basilic vein is because it is one of three veins: because it takes away the evil that is in the throat and chest, and from there it cuts off the belly.
Then the healer who is performing bloodletting on this vein should be careful to avoid it because it has an artery, and if he makes a mistake in the incision of the bloodletting and corrects it in the incision of the bloodletting, then he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, so that it must not be made with a sharp incision; otherwise, it leads to death.
Then if the basilic does not appear by a clear sign, then you should leave that and move to the other one, or search for some thread; or bloodletting on its end of the arm because that is clear; and cut it with a surgical knife, and make bloodletting on it as needed.
Then if you want to make bloodletting on the forearm, then you should move in front of the tightness of the arm that you touch the location within which you know the location of the wrists, and then place your hand over it; and then cut the arm and make bloodletting on it as needed. Then be careful to strike the pulse at a certain distance from the location of the artery.
Then when you tie it tightly, and blow into the location that you have blown on the wrist, then that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and so let it go.
Then if the blood flows in the bloodletting as needed with a small pulse, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and then you should stop the bleeding for a long time; and if the pulse is absent, then tighten the arm and let it be.
And keep the patient from moving him, and be afraid of him and do not hurt him for a few days until he is healed.
Then if the blood is absent, and you do not have medicine there, then you make an incision in the artery, if it appears to you; because its end is contracted, and the blood is absent; or that you take a piece of garlic, and cut that, and bring the one, and tighten it over the location of the vein with a twist, and put dust within the other day.
Then if the blood is absent, then it is good; and otherwise, then you treat him with water of which he was reminded in memory of the location of the powder that causes the absence of blood.
Is difficult to cause the absence of blood in the small location of leprosy and the possibility of breaking the arm.
Then the relief of bloodletting on the dark vein is good when it takes away the evil that comes from the head and leaves the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and the cephalic, as I have said before.
Then the healer who performs bloodletting on this vein should be careful in performing bloodletting because that vein is a nerve; and then if he makes a mistake in the incision of the bloodletting and cuts that nerve, it will lead to stupor, and its recovery is difficult for him; and those nerves can be seen when they are excited; and if this nerve is hidden from some people and it is subtle and does not show itself, then you should pause the bloodletting at which point you are performing the bloodletting with a section of alnessil, and avoid cutting that nerve with your own blade.
Then if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in its length.
The relief of bloodletting on the cephalic vein is that it draws away the evil from the head and brings those evil things to the feet.
Then in this way, if you want to make bloodletting on an olive or a water-knife: because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not leave the artery or nerve.
This may be the case with some men, when they do not bleed first, but rather, if they are bled out after the first blow has been struck, they will not get a pimple.
The first of it is that you should know that bloodletting is not administered except in the conservation of health and with the hope of its recovery, and that it is performed in one of the veins that are in the leg, namely: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that it is performed at the beginning of the first season, on spring in spring and autumn at the start of winter, when there appear signs of swelling.
And let bloodletting be done and the third day or at the first opportunity that passes three hours from the day.
But bloodletting that is administered, but when it causes convenience and necessity for water, or if it is necessary or desirable at any time of the day, in the whole hour and all times.
And let it not be bled out before it has reached twelve years of age and let the female not be bled out until she is seven years old, and let the old ones not be bled out if they have already passed sixty years.
And if some wish to be bled in any way, they should prepare their bowels beforehand by using a hot bath, if there is a tear retained, so that the veins do not draw the excess during bloodletting from the bowels, which are impure, and do not affect the main members.
And let no one be bled out from patients who are nauseous and have a craving for something or from a hangover, and let bloodletting be avoided if it is associated with pain near the colon, or that there is nausea, vomiting, or abdominal aching, or a multiplication of urine, work, and exertion, and of eating meals or staying awake, and of any cause that dissolves the virtue, whether it is in the body itself28 or in animals.
Then consider carefully the subtle humors beforehand if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it can come to blood.
Then enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise through some exercise so that the blood is subtleized.
Then pause bloodletting from him in the feet of the day, which is around the hour of third, then let's go.
Then let the feet of that person be guarded on that day from all animal accidents, if it is distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, if it is unnecessary work, idleness, and similar to them.
And at the same time, let those who use it be aware of the causes, by which the customs of men are determined with regard to aromatic substances and odours and balms and similar things according to the possibility.
Then follow the bloodletter on a cushion that is higher or that the cushion of that person who should be bled out.
Then extract the person's arms and wipe it with two or three strokes of the bloodletter's towel; then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it around those two strokes.
Then let the tightness be moderate, because tightness when it is tight to the skin or the blood vessels is too much, and let there not be any breaking of the skin; but if it is a softening, then let the body' blood not be broken.
Then let the tightness be felt, for that person who should be bled out wipes their hands together between them before the veins are swollen and can be felt.
Then let the bloodletter spread a little olive oil on his bloodletting properly; then let him pause his left hand over that vein, leaving the spot from which the bloodletting should be performed, so that the vein runs out a little, and the percussion stops because of the veins that is why it is full of air, and when you pause the bloodletting on that spot, it contracts; then let the bloodletter discover; and the bloodletting does not squeeze the vein, and if it squeezes, that vein is closed.
Therefore, for bloodletting, let the bloodletter be stopped and sought out in all these causes.
Then pause bloodletting, but if the vein is caught in one stroke, then let it be stopped; otherwise, go to another stroke of that spot a little, or on top of the foot, if the spot is not bled out.
And if the spot is bled out, or the patient' feet cause a fear, then let it rest for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because it will bring about a bad pimple, nor enter into a bath.
Then repeat bloodletting if needed.
And if the sight is small and the blood causes a slight pain, and you fear that it will not get the right amount of blood, then repeat the bloodletting in that spot again according to the correction, and adjust a little bit in the sight, and do so at the top of the foot in front of the location before it bleeds out, because the spot is bled out when it bleeds out.
But if that person has bled out before, then do not repeat it on him, because there is no excuse for this cause; and pause on that spot of the vein, because it cheers up the body' blood vessels. It is better in this spot than oil and what else.
Then administer oil fenda in all bloodletting, and the veins should be protected from the cors of the blood, and make water with a little honey and sage when it is paused from one of those on the spot, because the blood has been subtleized and has turned when it is thick.
And if in the spot of bloodletting a large pimple is generated, because spots occur, and more so on that person who does not stop bleeding from that spot but bleeds out from another spot, or in the sight of a vein, then let you go to sleep, and pause over the spot sponge infused with water and salt, a little scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
Then let that blood come out of the vein of that person with the help of another vein.
And if it remains in that spot for a few days any blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you want to, pause on some cause of aloe and sage dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or bitter or resembling it.
Then pimple spots occur so that bloodletting is performed from the basilic vein.
Then pause your hand over that spot, and if you feel a softening of that spot, then let your hand be stopped on that cause of water that we have said, because a strong flow will come from the blood vessel.
Then make a wound with the water in which it is tightened, so that the spot be hardened, and then let you heal it with another healing.
Then extract from him according to the amount of his virtue and according to the winning color above the blood.
When the sun is black, leave it in the sun until it dries; and if it seems fat, leave it until it becomes thin; and if it seems acute, leave it until its acuity diminishes.
And if someone is bloated and strong and needs extraction of urine in a single vein, let the haemorrhage from the vein be increased and let the haemorrhage flow.
And if it is hot, do the opposite of what has been said; and if the extraction is to be made in several veins, let the трауч be tight.
And the best thing that can be done in a vein haemorrhage is that it be transverse section, not puncture.
This method of haemorrhage is free from loss of blood and injury to the nerves; it is more praiseworthy and more save than haemorrhage according to length and width.
And to those who are accustomed to fainting before haemorrhage, let there be given to them a little drink of water with grains of pepper or simple oxymel cut up; and extract the urine from him in three veins or four.
And if it is a fever, let there be given to them before haemorrhage an infusion in syrup of myrrh or in syrup of honey aromatized with spices such as cloves, ginger, cinnamon and others, or in scented and spiced syrup.
And if fainting occurs because of a sudden loss of blood, let there be given to them to drink water of the flesh and syrup with subtle spices; and use some perfumery, and bind their feet with those.
And use the other causes that we have spoken of in the division on fainting because of elimination.
And who wants to ease his arms and dissolve his blood according to the second vein, let him be bled little by little, for this virtue is present in him; and if it is to be done continuously, do so in small doses.
But if he wants to ease his arms and take away his blood according to the third vein, and his body is strong, let him be bled after seven or nine hours from the first haemorrhage.
But who wants to take away the blood of his body according to the opposite direction in which it is flowing, let him be bled on the second or third day.
But that body in which there is much blood already lost and it is acute and causes a fever to rise, let him be bled in one vein and let a great quantity of blood flow; and let your hand rest on the pulse of his body, so that he does not die of fainting, because if the haemorrhage is sudden, such as it is, then the person will die.
And when you want to ease his arms and eliminate the blood according to the fourth vein, if it is already closed the orifice of the vein and difficult to extract the blood, then press below it with vehemence and extend your hand gently, because that is too bad.
While you are left until the second haemorrhage is complete; or if it is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein, or if you have pressed it with a light pressure; or if you hold it between your thighs and gently press, so that the blood comes out.
And if the vein is broken, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the bruise has subsided.
And if necessity compels you to bleed again, and it is not an excuse, then let him bleed on the same place or in another vein of his other arm.
And the vein called "braca's sling" is bled in place of the "sling" or "arch", since it is not twisted or hidden, because it is composed of them.
The quality of the haemorrhage is that the patient puts his hand in cold water, so that his skin becomes red and that the vein appears clearly.
And let it be bound tightly on him with a narrow bandage; and let haemorrhage be made transversally, not longitudinally or according to length.
And let the opening be wide and let your haemorrhage be made with that by which you bleed him on the joint of his hand a little bit.
And if the flow of blood is forbidden, then you shall put your hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until you obtain your need.
But if you are in the winter days, then you are excused from putting your hand in cold water again; but let the body of the patient be put into cold water at that time when it is summer.
And this vein's haemorrhage is more save than that of any other vein, because it has not a pulsating vein or nerves.
And the haemorrhage from the right-hand arm is different from that of the left-hand arm.
And the quality of the haemorrhage is that you bind it tightly with a bandage or with your hand, since you have put it in cold water, until the vein becomes inflamed and clearly visible; and let the haemorrhage be made transversely; and if it is heated, let it not be seen.
And remember that you do not tie your hand after the haemorrhage, because there are nerves under those naked pieces of flesh.
And let your hand be put again in cold water and let the blood run into that, because if you do not put it in cold water, the blood will clump up at the opening of the vein and its flow will be forbidden.
And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of need, then let you put your hand over oil and salt so that it does not harden completely; and apparently let you do all this in a straight way.
But the improvement of haemorrhaging from his left-hand arm is that it corresponds to his own body.
And do the same thing with haemorrhage from him by doing the opposite.
And the improvement of the vein is to those who are leaving their body; and if it is a mother's body, and if there is a retention of menses, and to the maladictions of the lungs and ulcers of the feet and legs, and the similarity of the maladictions.
And the quality of the haemorrhage is that the patient puts his foot in cold water and makes a friction on him until the veins appear; and let him bind his foot with a bandage at the junction of his foot; and may the vein be ramified in many places on the face of his foot.
And so he bleeds him from the broadest place or if it is hidden under the skin, let him bleed him at the joint of his foot, because it is better and more save; and let him bind it tightly after bleeding.
And if you bleed him on the face of his foot, then let you be careful of the nerves that are under that place on the face of his foot; and let your haemorrhage be made transversely, as if it were to be cut.
And let it not be slow.
But if the flow of blood is forbidden, then you shall put his foot in cold water again and let the blood run into that until it is evacuated.
And if the haemorrhage-maker has made a mistake in the first vein, then let him make it again slightly, because the location is good; and do not fear of it, but be careful of the nerves, as we have said.
And seemingly make the sole of the other foot a cup.
And from the sciatic nerve, at that place we have said, let the tail be separated from the shell of the wild ox.
And the relief of the bloodletting is at the hip when it is done by the sanctification of cautery.
And the quality of bloodletting on him is that the patient goes into a bath, and he hastens and strengthens his thigh from the side of the hip through his tail with four thin pieces of leather made into a long and thin belt, for it does not appear except by this.
And so when it appears, then do bloodletting at the second joint that is available and according to the cross, for that is best; or cut it with a cutting or cut it with a cutting, since its place is salt.
And it is in the shape of a horse's foot; and if you find this one hard, and does not appear to all feelings, then do bloodletting on some limb of him, and that is which appears on the second toe of the foot behind the little finger.
And take care of the nerves, and run the sanctification according to what you want.
Then return the tightness and rest on the place of bloodletting with a knot and strengthen the place, for little by little it is cured.
Of ventilation and of the qualities to use from those.
Ventilated as with corns, or with warts, or with vermin.
And ventilation is done according to two ways: one is bloodletting and extracting the sanctification, and the other is ventilation through bloodletting.
And this ventilation that is bloodletting through cutting is according to two ways, for either it is with fire or fire is with it.
And the places of ventilation administered by bloodletting and extracting sanctification are twelve parts of the body, of which one is placed under the chin on the jawbone at the back of the mouth; and two spatulas; and two holes, and it is on the tail; and two firepits, and they are from two legs; and two hernias; and two joints.
And ventilation does not extract the sanctification except from small veins in the flesh, and through them the virtue is not extracted by that, so it is not a fire made in any disease by repetition within; nor is it a fire made in any part of the body that all the body is evacuated.
Maybe if necessity provokes ventilation for disease or continuously, we will administer it at the beginning of the meal and at its end, and in the middle place and at any time.
And therefore when it happens in any of these causes, and especially if it is in the third or half of the meal, then we order ventilation to be done rather than passed over two or three hours from now.
And the relief of ventilation from the nape is that when it makes gravity in the head and falls into the throat; but if this be not evacuated from all the body.
And this ventilation is in the place of bloodletting on the cephalic.
And it is not good that he uses the one who is a grating noise, or in which there is a catarrh, for it does great damage.
And by that it is not good to use the one who makes noise with his old age, and in the heads of those who are diseases from the heat.
Maybe to the one who uses it continuously on him is made oblivion; and by that you command the ventilator to pause his hand a little from the ventose at the ends, for fear of the generation of oblivion.
Maybe ventilation from ale is in the place of bloodletting from the dark vein and the basilica: and by that you confer with asthma, and with constriction of throat and with the splitting of the instrument of throat, and with coughs, and with swelling.
And if ventilation from ale is stopped for a little while, because if it is paused from the sides, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And ventilation from ale makes the accidents of pain in the head and ophthalmia, and emigration, and pre-focus, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of bloodletting from the basilica.
And if you command the ventilator to not press his hand for fear that he does not cut the artery and causes a flow of blood.
And ventilation from the jaw makes alchole in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and appearances of other diseases that are in the mouth, and stand in the place of bloodletting from elsewhere that they are on the two lips.
Maybe the ventilation that is made over the two spatulas makes Caphothan, which is made by swelling with heat.
And ventilation from the two spades inside the fire makes the juvament of bloodletting from three veins, and if it is from the basilica, dark, and cephalic, for that one attracts all the sanctification from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and these small veins from the other large ones within so that the attraction reaches the three veins.
And you command the ventilator not to process in cutting, for the place is naked of flesh, and leaves it without nerves and arteries.
And it is ventilation that is made according to the same, and makes you to have venereal diseases and ulcers from the side of the leg.
And if you command the ventilator to be very strong ventilation, and that it is with warts, for the place does not endure strong separation; and strongly make the thin, subtle cuts of bloodletting by cutting.
Maybe ventilation of the thin cambias by clear evidence, for they attract all the sanctification from the body, and make you to have old pains in the cheeks and in the mother's breast, and in the bladder; and they cause the menses to come out early, and make you thirsty and tired; and stand in the place of bloodletting from two toes, and alhorcoben, and from two hernias.
But they greatly harm all the body and cause fainting fits in horses.
And from the ventilation of alhorcoben, the relief is proportionate to the relief by the ventilation of two cambias.
And the quality of the position of the ventilation is that you pause the wind at the beginning and let it flow quickly through a narrow passage, and do not prolong the position of the wind; but pause it gently, and remain in that position, and so that the humors come to their place by arrival in a hurry. And do not stop doing it again and continue within so that you see the place already turning red and swelling, and the appearance of the sanctification's heat.
And so you should cut and scrape again and again little by little, and consider the position of each limb.
That person who has thick, tough skin should be cut once and not again, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And order the fan to intensify the scraping and add a little more, and ease the suction slightly.
And if the wound is thick, then you should cut it twice, for in the first cut the way of diffusion to the wound and the liquid that comes out will be opened up. Then in the second, the diagnostic of the removal of thick matter is obtained.
And if the wound is very foul-smelling, then you should make the third cut so that you obtain the final product.
Finally, when we want to extract small amounts of matter or a little bit at a time, it is enough for us to make one cut.
And if we want to extract a large amount of matter, then you should cut in one direction, and if you know that the wound is deep, then you should make a long cut.
And the term for cutting which is the depth of the wound alone.
And if the skin of that person is thick, hard, dark and the pores are tight, long, resolute; if it is in summer, then apply oil of aloes or violet oil, or mixed oil, or rosewater; and if it is in winter, then olive oil, or lavender oil, chamomile oil, or marjoram oil, and to those that resemble them.
And if the superfluity is thick and green, then apply oil that is bitter, or violet oil, or aloe oil, or yarrow oil, and to those that resemble them.
And if the fan is of average size and has thick skin, then it is forbidden to apply oil, and that the areas of the fan's blades come close together, then wash with cold water or very hot water, or with wine, or with rosewater, and to those that resemble them.
And if the wound is of moist nature, then wash the fan' blades with grape juice or water from myrtle and pomegranate, and to those that resemble them.
And if the excesses are thick, then wash the fan' blades with wine that has been aged, or water from sage, which is marjoram, or an infusion of fennel, or chamomile, and to those that resemble them.
And that the fan be kept in front of a fire; and when it is administered close to the fire for an hour or two, and let it sleep close to the fan.
What should be done so that the fan is operated on before bloodletting.
Then consider the beginning: if the fan or the one who is to be bled is coleric and acts on the wound acutely, then you should use cooling agents, such as milk with vinegar and lettuce leaves, and sitz baths, hyssop, and mint tea, and those that resemble them.
And stop their meals such as grains, and meat of small birds, and prepared dishes that are spicy, and those that resemble them.
And if the constitution is yellow, then take in honeyed syrup or almond syrup, and pomegranate juice, and a little of fragrant water; and to him it is forbidden to eat much, and stop his meals of grains, and canaries, and pisons, and small birds, and kolbrants.
And that on the day of fan operation and bloodletting, the liquid is greater than the meal.
And it is given to some men of the first order of wine mixed with honey, or medicine of musk, which is musk, before the fan operation or bloodletting, or close to them, so that the main limbs are comforted and the wound is diffused; and it is not forbidden for those who have a scalfice.
Then the fan blades that are cut should be paused on the thigh, and on the feet, and on the heel, and on the navel, for these limbs do not suffer from cutting.
And it is not desired by those for the attraction of blood from a limb, then pause the fan on the mammary gland in the flow of blood from the limb of the breast; and use that which dissolves the fresh wind of the limb, thus pausing over the navel and the belly; for that one softens the limb and soothes it by diffusing the wind.
And it is paused on the cheeks when it happens in their operation or rain, for by the virtue of the strong attraction it helps the operation and removes the rain from its place.
And it resembles when it is paused on the thigh or foot, that wind is diffused in those enclosed members.
And these fans are administered with water only; and some are administered with fire.
And some are filled with cold water in the flow of blood from the foot.
And water is used to fill the fan, and it is added if it becomes strong, or in which herbs are cut with water suitable for this purpose.
The form of the fan administered with fire: its width is twice as much as its height, and the quantity of fuel is twice that of a palm; and it should be in the center of the circle, the main part being near the edge, and the small part at the top. And if something goes into it, then put an iron needle in it.
It should be made of wood or iron, of broad margins, lion's mouth, tongue, and third for the sake that it does not affect the limb in its natural position on it.
And it should be made of crossbeams of wood or iron, and let it burn bright.
And this large fan is greater than that which we have described above; and the smaller one, in accordance with the flow of blood from the limb and the condition of the person who uses it.
And the fans that are refreshing and relaxing are different from those for young people and broad-shouldered ones.
And the quality of pausing this fan with fire on the limb is that you extend the beam with a good fire in front of a small candle of wax, and pause it on the middle crossbeam in the center place of the fan so that the fire does not burn up the limbs of the patient.
And it should be paused on the limb of the patient, and the fire should be directed at the angle that we have described, except that when the fans are present, and do not desire that they block the light from the fire, and the wind is diffused from it.
And light the beam according to its way, and repeat the operation if you do not desire that fan.
Then in a fan administered in the navel of a patient, with water only, and which is not filled except with water, and it is paused on the limb alone.
And this form of it: This fan should be as large as possible, so that it may receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter 77.
Sanguineous are not administered in large limbs but in the members where it is impossible to position fans, due to their size, such as the head and throat, or the limb devoid of skin, such as the nose and lips, and those that resemble them.
And the quality of using those which if you have found leeches that are in the water of the world of corruption.
And let them lie down in the water, warm, until they are hungry, and do not cause any pain in the belly of those; and let them be washed out with the cauls, and let the feet be scrubbed; and let them be placed on them.
And when they are filled, and if need be.
And if it is possible to suck the juice out of the place, it is more useful in healing.
But if not, then wash the place with wine and rub it with water; and let it be fried and pressed.
And if the bodies of the patients are prolonged, then place a cloth on them in warm water, and let it remain there until the residue is removed; and then stick it on with a pin, so that the residue does not come out again.
And if the patient is numerous, then sprinkle on them three-part vinegar, or eggs and other things similar to their stinging causes, until the patient is cleansed; or let them be placed on the place where the may flowers of cooked beans are placed, and let them be placed there until the beans stick to the place, and the patient is cleansed.
And then, if necessary, an iteration of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
And if leeches are forbidden by suspension, then let the place be rubbed with the patient's fresh blood or a needle is inserted into the place where the blood comes out, and let them be placed there; because those who feel any pain so quickly as not to wait.
And when you want them to fall, sprinkle on them a little of the dried aloe, or salt, or ash, and every now and then as well.
So begins the process of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of a fracture and an accidental dislocation in the bones.
Or son true, and thou shalt know that those who praise this chapter are ignorant doctors and those who at any time have not regarded the free books of the ancients or read one letter of them.
And for this reason the way of the scientists in our land is hidden; and I have not forgotten it for a moment because of the reading of the books of the ancients and the study upon their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
And let experiments and studies follow in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and on which my experiment passed; because it has renewed what was needed to you and freed me from the occupation of elaborating; and it has renewed what was needed at the end; and it has shown what was needed at the end of the statement; and it has formed in it the forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by adding a declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Of the essence and collection of fractures of the bones, from which the premiss necessary is taken before we begin to remark the broken members and different if of each one. So, then, that I may say in the proem of this chapter the sum of the speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which it is necessary for the artisan to be standing on the truth of them; so are you and those who are prompt that they knew or learned this noble art of others, not yours.
And therefore say that when it happens to any fracture or dislocation or twisting or a fall, you then let there be a caulk with the caulking wax or a needle, or any instrument, if not prohibited by any cause; in this way as to destroy the virtue, or it is that which has happened to it, or old age, or time of violent heat, or violent cold.
And let there be placed in a warm drink of freshly cut herbs and meat of fowl and crabs; and prohibit the meat that fills the veins with blood, unless you are certain of the apoplexy, and if you do not fear the flow of matter into the member.
And then return the patient to his first care with him who usually takes care of it.
And so begins the restoration of a broken bone; and then say that the patient is fed with nutritious food, thick and heavy and difficult to digest, as if it is cooked bread made with water, and ris, and beans, and fresh milk, and meat, and honey, and this food is made into a blood clot, gradually and smoothly; and this food is given in this way of diet.
And you know that the bones heal when they are in men in their first youth and in old age; it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the limbs of them.
But nature adjusts and amends upon the broken bone of all parts any cause similar to glut in which it is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until it is joined together, unless there be a cause that prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary to stop the food of the patient, in the food of which there is thickness and viscosity and gravity, as we have said.
And you know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the neck bone is different from the fracture of the head bone; and the fracture of the leg bone is diverse from the fracture of the foot bone; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I have already recalled all the types of fracture in a separate chapter, distinguished from the other.
Diversity of fracture within itself. And the types of fractures of the bone are diversified in their own lengths; because it happens to fracture with an arch that is opposite from above; and some are fractured according to the length of the bone: and such as those that are made by a pen, and those that are made by a pencil, and those that are made by a quill; and such as those which are broken in the head, and those which are broken in the face, and those which are broken in the neck, and those which are broken in the arms, and those which are broken in the legs, and those which are broken in the feet.
And all the species is made or a torment proper for the restoration of it according to that which will come; and this is a reminder of it, distinguished in its place.
A symbol of fracture of the bone. And by this is known the fracture of the bone; it is a twist of it, and from that is the prominence and appearance of it to the sense, and such as it is when you touch it with your hand.
And then when it is not in the place of the appearance of a twist and it does not cause great pain when you touch the bone with agitation, and the patient does not change much, then it is not here that there is a fracture.
And then it is possible that there is a twist or a small crack, unless you then feel it with your hand and press it together; and let there be placed on it the medicines of which you have a reminder; and let it be made tight by subtle tightening.
And know that the place when it is arched and not divided into two or another water that does not enter him in his seat, and all is revived from its part, then cover that you begin at your hour to correct him who caused it, so that it happens to him apoplexy cautery.
And if it is caused to him apoplexy cautery, then leave that for a few days until the apoplexy ceases; and put that second in any way that you can of levitation and of engine.
And know that the restoration of him and his revulsion is lighter than bone in which he happens apoplexy satagie.
Then strengthen that second when comes the remembrance of him.
May be if in the bone there are satagias, then is necessary an extension of this broken member from two parts, if it is the leg or the foot; or one rope or one rope and the main; or two ropes or one rope and the main.
And be your position to that you pause the member local placed according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then know that you make points on them again in engine and according to any way that you can do it in their places.
And watch according to your force that does not happen on the patient by your operation or injury of him; and persevere according to the good power that you apply the one bone to the other his companion according to their best forms.
And when in that hour you can take advantage of him who touches your main hand, and if there is some other reason, then correct it and put it back for the quantity of your virtue.
And do violent extensions and compressions, so that in this way funny metges are caused to happen apoplexy cautery by their operation, or cause a contraction in the member so that water is caused to happen through the operation of its funny metges.
And know that the quality of the stricture of the member is that which I recommend you; so that you know that broken members are different in their little one and in their big one and in the shape of those.
And of those that are small so when the arm and the finger and the hand are close together and similar to those, then know that the wrapping is of a thin cloth.
May be those that are large so when the thigh or the chest is covered, then know that in them there is a wrapping all over and it is hard, because the tie all over connects the member that is big and strong with stricture, also knowing that in him there is not an imperfection.
Then begin, then your evacuation of equation, pause carefully according to him, on the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to which member you want; and strengthen your main hand a little according to the tie.
Then look at that one in the first place that is more dominant than the place of the fracture, and strengthen your tie that does not cut your stricture according to which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. Then extend yourself a little according to the wrapping of the place of the fracture, and soften your stricture little by little until you get from the place a large part.
Then take another object and wrap that one also over the broken place with a wrapping, and when you have finished with the first wrapping, then look at the wrappings in the first part that is more distant from the fracture; and be your operation in the stricture of the wrapping and in softening it according to what we said in the first wrapping.
Then pause between the wrappings of leather or cloth according to which is put the tortuosity of the fracture if there is any tortuosity; and if not, do not pause because of any reason.
Then pause over another object, and put those second wrappings again gently made, if there is no inflammation or apoplexy cautery in the place, then pause over that water which causes the apoplexy of that one and which opens the inflammation; and leave that for a few days; and then you strengthen them according to him.
Then the sticks of a cane are smaller, and be formed wisely; or they are of palm wood; or of oak branches; and be the width of each stick according to this shape and this figure:
However know that the stick that is paused on that fracture is more dominant and more distant than a small one of those other sticks, and the length of the stick according to its size and little one; then strengthen them over another object according to your first stricture; and pause again with a faithful fastening according to which you have strengthened; and it happens that the stricture is less as it approaches the fracture, and more as it is distant from the fracture.
And know that the ropes are half-thick and soft, and if they are thick, then look at them according to their operation when you pause those rope parts of string; and it is a great mistake when the stricture is made equal.
And little ropes are not convenient because you cannot achieve a stricture with them, and it is not convenient that there is between one stick and another stick the measure of one finger.
And if the patient is covered by the ends of those sticks according to the stricture in places that are more dominant, then pause from those second stick parts of leather or woven cloth within that water does not do an injury to him.
Some fractures are caused by laughter, and happens a disruption in the chain, and I come with the memory of that one in the second according to its uniqueness.
And know that a broken member is not strict with the sticks on the first day; which happens because the member, when it is big, does not happen to stop on the sticks but from three to seven days according to your certainty about the coming of apoplexy cautery.
This is the way of the old physicians who restore them, those that are paused on a fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Method of wrapping as a shower of water for the restoration of a fracture, with care to make it fit according to complicated forms and more so to women and young people because it is not hot on that part which you wrap; and know that you take flour powder, and it is the meal of the flour that does not change the movement of the miller in the places of the mill.
And put that second, then know that it is not a way to wrap him, but a way to rub him with an alb of cow, and pause the wrapping of this one that is not thin or subtle; then use it.
Another way to make plasters that will heal fractures and dislocations and twists: take assafetida, myrrh, labdanum, acacia, and migraner salvage, all of which are called milgraner; myrrh and aloes, one dragon; all three are finely chopped and mixed with water or milk; if the patient's complex is scarred, use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones gently, and gives strength to many people.
Another way to make plasters that will heal fractures and twists: Take migraner and water or milk, one dragon; myrrh and aloes, two dragons; acacia and balsam, six dragons; all are finely chopped up.
All of this should be ground in a mortar and made into a paste; it should then be kneaded with water or milk and administered.
A way of making an ointment for painful joints and separated bones from their places, which causes pain in them and cracks and fractures: take sheep wool and soak it in wine and oil and place it on the area.
May not be useful for restoring virtue, but it is useful for expelling a fever and pain in general.
Another way of making an ointment that restores broken bones: Take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush them all together and make an ointment out of it.
A way of making a refreshing ointment that is useful for the resolution of a fever: Take razes of alyssum, chamomile and violet flowers, flour of erysima, and all together; All of this should be kneaded together and applied to the body if the member is not swollen.
If it is swollen, then apply cold water or cold milk; then use oil.
Another way of making a strong ointment for this purpose, when a fever persists: take razes of alyssum and fennel, and senna, bilberry, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, and all together; knead them all together and apply to the body according to the quality of the member and rest of the body.
May not be useful in this case, but a ointment made of wax and oil may help; it should not be too thick or too thin; and remember that the quality of the ointment is important to heal the member properly.
May not be useful in this case, but it is clear that they should be applied to the injured member to help with healing; using small amounts of quality oils such as olive oil, almond oil, and other similar oils for this purpose.
A way of making an ointment that is useful for injuries and pain: take a little meat from the back of the neck, from the hair, or from the skin; also take some alyssum, salt, and parsley; knead them together and make it into a paste, then apply it.
May the amount be according to the quality of the wound that needs to be cleaned and removed; consider if there is no pain or injury, and if the bone is not broken and it hurts in its place, then do not use this ointment. And if there is pain or swelling in the area that needs to be treated with a ointment, then you can use it at any time; apply the ointment and cover it with a bandage.
And take a cloth and marine sponge and wet it with cold water; submerge that cloth in the bowl of oil and rub it; then apply the oil to the area until the swelling and pain subside; then leave the member at rest for an hour; then apply the oil again for one hour more; this will help to calm the swelling and pain.
Then repeat that gently and apply a small amount of ointment again; remember to apply it gently so that it heals properly.
If the fever, pain, swelling and other accidents are all gone by themselves and you do not need any ointment or compression; then you can stop using it.
And if there is no cause for the member's pain or swelling; then do not use it anymore, but only for three days or four or five or six. and some are left for twenty days according to what is necessary for the wound to heal properly; then apply it, taking care that the fracture heals correctly and that the skin does not come off over it.
Then adjust the compression slightly more than before; match it with the thickening of the oil used previously; then remember that the healing process for this wound has begun.
May the member of the broken part dry and become thinner than before; then you will know that this food is forbidden to it; so dip it in cold water regularly throughout the day; then keep it wet for three days more; then adjust the compression slightly; and for this operation, send food to the member, and it will heal gradually.
May the water help to restore the broken member and also to restore other members if necessary; then it will help to restore it according to its shape, which is an error in this operation, causing fear, and if it is a back injury, it will make the pain worse with movement.
I have not seen such a thing happen before; so it is more reasonable to think that this does not happen.
Chapter about the fracture of the skull.
The types of fractures are different, and the causes are distinct, because there is a fracture due to impact with an object, and this impacts all the bones inside it, leaving them broken in pieces like a pot; or an object cuts some part of the bone, and it cuts into the flesh, and this type of fracture is called a complete or absolute fracture.
The pain of these two types of fractures is great or slight, and the cause of this pain is impact with a stone or falling from a height, and it looks similar to them.
This fracture is penetrating the skin of the person whose skull it has broken; or it is on the face of the skull, and the pain of these two types of fractures is great or slight.
And there is a fracture that is hidden in the bone, which is very thin hair; and this type of fracture is called a hairline fracture.
And this is a fracture that is caused by impact with a stone or falling from a height, and it looks similar to them; which makes a piece of the bone break into pieces and enter the concave part of the skull; when this happens due to their impact, they break into pieces inside the skull.
And mostly it is broken in human bones, especially in the skull; such as the caps of teeth.
And all these types of fractures are painful, and they cause pain when separated. And I have come to remember all this in its place.
I will describe all these types of fractures by detection, and by questioning their appearance and the corruption of the flesh that is over them.
The hairline fracture is recognized by its appearance on the bone and is removed, and it is covered with oil, because the fracture appears black.
Here is the translation of the text:
And if you do not expect these incorrect injuries to heal, then begin the patient's treatment.
This is the cause why if he has come to you with a plague in the beginning when it was in the winter days, then know that you must study the position of the bone before the thirteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the summer days, then know that you must set the bone before the seventh day, letting it be corrupted by the membrane that covers the bone, and that the following injuries occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane that covers the brain, and is broken into little pieces and torn, then know that you must drill the broken parts according to how I will advise you.
And that you must cut the patient' hair that is infected, and discover on top of the bone according to custom and manner as I can advise you following the figure of the plague, and that it is lighter on the patient.
And if an accident happens to you and you must remove the bone, and flow of blood or pus is seen, then pause for a moment and it is that you clean the place where the drape is soaked in wine and olive oil, and allow the wound to rest while you make sure there is no more flow of blood; and then begin around the bone and the ablation of it.
And this should be according to two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you must drill the bone with a sharp chisel, and this is the form of it: And then administer another chisel on this one, a little less than that one; and this is the form of it:
And then administer more of the chisel that is less than the second one.
And then you must name various chisels, some of which are less sharp than others; and some of them are sharper than others and are made of iron or steel.
And use their ease in striking on the chisels that you do not feel pain in your hand and head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you must bore through it before administering the chisels on the surface, these are called superficial trays.
And they are not named as such because they do not stop the end of the bone from reaching water that is nearby, because the tray has a round extremity or margin on it that is left to rest over it that seems like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these trays a great number of them, because each one is adapted to the thickness of each bone, and all are presented in all heads from the brain's end which has an acute extremity, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the amount of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three kinds of trays: The quality of boring through the broken bone is that you pause the tray on the bone and turn it with tweezers within what you know the bone has already been penetrated; and then move it to another place, and pause there while passing the quantity of the thickness of the ray or surround it.
And then you must drill with chisels where each turn of the bone passes, and make it smaller than that which can be easily lifted in its end by levitation, as I have said, within what you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause using small instruments to do this at water, for example, tongs and forceps.
And then you must be very careful that the chisel does not touch any cause of the cyphers.
And so after having bored through the bone completely, and separating it from the cyphers if it continues with it, then you extract it, and then insert it in the asperity of water that is in the bone with another instrument that seems like a chisel, but it is much larger and more sharp than the other chisels.
And if any part of the small bones remains in the wound, then know that you must use this one with ease at water that is necessary for the instruments; and then clean there the plague with leeches and wash those which I have said.
And the other way of operation is light, far from fear, which I call the method of Galyia and the Louzeau by large lances; and this is its speech: It is necessary for you in the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is most violent and most apparent, within what happens when you have discovered that part and have paused it with this chisel that is soft and light which this one is:
And that the spherical part is large and does not cut any cause, and that the sharp part is divided in two parts before the length, so that it is divided from the bone's face with a sharp part in the center.
And then hit the chisel on a part with a small mallet so that it drills all the bone with ease, and you will be sure of the membrane that is not happening in any way how to fear in any way, and if the medicine had been the most violent of all the men and the least ignorant about them; certainly, and if it was sleeping.
And if it has happened that a cause is attached to the bone from the membrane in some places of the bones, then you will drill it with this chisel that is soft and large, and remove it with ease, because it is removed from the bone's face which is not damaged or painful.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the membrane, and what is removed or remains with the bone is its face, and there is in it asperity and sharp parts that are small, then know that you will cut this asperity and remove these sharp parts with very sharp ones which you have prepared in different amounts so that you can administer them in all places as most convenient for your operation of that broken bone and the figure of it.
And if you administer in your hand with the chisel that is less sharp at the beginning of its work, and then use those very sharp ones which are the most sharp, and do not stop doing this until you have reached the end of its work, within what you can administer the most sharp and small ones of all.
And in any other small hair fractures or subtle fracture, then know that you must work according to what you feel with your hand.
And this is the cause why it is not applied to all those who have studied in that art. And he writes on water that we have shown in great fractures.
And if the membrane is rectangular when you remove the bone, then know that you must take a piece of cloth according to the amount of the plague, and submerge it in wine and olive oil, and pause it over the opening of the plague; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in water and oil, and pause it over the first one, and make the smallest cut that you can do on it, which does not hurt the cyphers; and then administer on it with sharp ones, and do not press it hard, but only for a quantity of plague.
And let him have this cure for a day or two until you are sure that the apoplexy is cured; and then go on to administer medicines in which there is no superfluous sapor, such as rice and flour, and also spice and herbal powder, and anything else of this kind.
And you should make a powder of these medicines which is to be scattered over the wound when it is dry; and generally administer to him all medicine having a property by which he does not suck or bite.
And be careful also in your skill that the wound in the cure should be clean; and do not put any ointment on it or anything else that might corrupt it; for when it is applied to the skin of the neck, it corrupts it and produces an evil plague upon the patient.
And it happens in the skin of the head, and when it is washed with water the bone appears more clearly, as well as when the cure is finished, and the surface becomes darker; so then you must be careful, for it can give rise to many diseases even though it seems cured.
And if you do not see blackness except from the medicine applied to it, and if that is due to the virtue of the medicine itself, then take a piece of honey and a little rosewater and mix them together; And put a thin cloth over it; then apply the spices of cure to it as you think fit for its healing;
Chapter III:
On the Restoration of a Broken Nose
Know that the nose is not broken into two pieces apart from each other, or one of those corners that has been dislocated; for it has two bones, because the part that breaks off is cartilaginous, and not broken, nor does it cause pain, but rather a sense of stiffness and difficulty in breathing.
But if one of the two pieces is broken off, then you must push back that little piece inside the other's nose, and press it with a small pin inside the nostril; and so bring back the nose to its natural position. Do this easily for him, and be careful not to hurt yourself in any way with your operations on the patient's nose.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the piece does not project, then make it equal to the end of the ridge where it is small in thickness.
And if the fracture is in two pieces, then you make a bridge for it.
And you should cure it with rest on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then in seven days put it to bed for gout.
Then introduce into the end of the nose a piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces, if it is in two parts; and make it as thick as the nostril's ridge.
And say to me of the old restorers that the calves are wrapped in cloth, and they are exchanged every day; but I have not seen it; provided that the cloth is wrapped in album with a little flour; then let the bone be held firm, and hardened the cartilage.
And some dislocations in the nose, instead of a calf, wrapped in a cloth that does not cover the whole nose; and that already has a fracture in the nose with great violence, and that the patient is forbidden to breathe deeply.
This cause does not require you; and if you want, make one, and if you want, make two.
And if there is another dislocation of gout in the nose, inject it with cerate or wax mixed with vinegar and rosewater, or with diazolin.
But if there is no gout, then you must inject it from the outside with flour of sesame mixed with herbal powder and a little albumen; and place a cloth over it, and do not cure the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken or dislocated slightly, then split them with a sharp instrument, and extract them from between them; then sew them together, and cure it with water that soothes and hardens it, and injects it with oil.
And if there is a wound inside the nose, then cure it with calves and administer tubes of lead into it, so that it may be fully healed.
Chapter IV:
On the Restoration of the Jaw When It is Broken
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is from the outside only, not split into two parts, and it is curved towards the inside, then its knowledge is limited; but if there is a fracture that breaks through, then you must cure it as for the nose.
And then, if the fracture is on the right side, you must push the left indicator of the mandible into the patient' mouth; and imaginatively, if the fracture is on the left side, then push the right indicator of the mandible into it; and push it with ease towards the outside, with your other hand, towards the end of the fracture; and make it equal to the end of the mandible.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then administer extension of two parts according to right angles, so that you can make it equal again.
And if there is a concussion of the teeth and a dislocation, then strengthen those that you hope will remain, with gold or silver or cedar; and place the cerate on the broken mandible, and place the double cloth over it, and carefully stretch it out, or tie it with one knot to the length of the mandible; and then apply your treatment as you think fit for its healing, so that it does not break.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and let him drink hot drinks.
And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then you should cure it for three days; and then make it right again, and inject it with flour, or albumen, or herbal powder, because you will have removed the cerate from it, and place over it the wool cloth.
And then, when you have fixed the plaster in place, and the position of the bone is not altered, let it be; for this fracture does not heal in three weeks.
And if there is another dislocation of gout in the mandible, then administer water that has been used for the treatment of gout, and let it remain in the mouth; and do not cure the mandible.
And if the fracture is in the bone, then consider whether it is a long fracture or not; and you should make those long fractures with water that you use for the treatment of such fractures.
And if the hole of the fracture is small, then you should amplify it with a needle according to the quantity of your need.
And then, when you have removed those long fractures, and if the hole of the fracture is wide, then sew it up with a needle that you have prepared for the purpose; and if there is another fracture in the same place, then do not cure it.
Chapter V:
On the Restoration of the Fork When It Is Broken
The fork is broken in one of three ways: either at the end of a muscle that runs through it, or between the ends; and this fracture can be caused by falling or striking against something.
Here is the translation of the text:
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is accompanied by pain, is that you make two ministers present, so that one holds the aid and secures the broken part, and the other extends the foot at that broken joint.
And then you should bend the break towards the inside so that its shape is according to that, and not in its small prominence or concavity.
And if you are in need of an extension, then do so by keeping the patient's thigh close to their body, using a cloth or wool, and make the length according to your need; and stretch out and raise the foot, and secure it with a bandage according to how it is broken.
And if you cannot throw the end of the foot outside the break because it reaches the knee, then do so that the patient's leg is supported on their thigh, and place a cushion halfway in size.
And the minister should press the muscle on the patient' side close to where the bone of the foot is elevated at the knee, and then you should straighten out the break and bend it according to that.
Perhaps if you feel pain from the fracture and it is difficult to move, then do so carefully and pull out those pains with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then do so carefully with one of the chisels you have laid aside for that purpose, since you have kept the foot away from the instrument which serves to cut it; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is such:
And it resembles a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its length should be according to the water you need for it, or the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Perhaps the length should be according to your ability to operate; that there are two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
And if the pain of the injury that you have cut when pulling out the pain from the bone is wide, and it is certain that it is an abscess, then do so by joining the two lips of the wound with sutures.
And if the pain is little, or you are afraid of an abscess, then do so by using a cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound on the skin.
And if an abscess develops, then dip a cloth in vinegar and oil, and place it over that.
And all of this, so that the stilet is not broken; and because you see the patient' leg every day, and when the ligament becomes soft or you notice that the stilet has been loosened, then do so by straightening it out and tightening the ligature.
And then you should place the patient' leg to rest on their shoulder, and place a small cushion under it so that its height is slightly raised, so that the support for that leg is above the neck of it; and because it raises the fracture of the foot up to the level of the muscle; or when it raises the neck of it.
And you should not loosen the ligament if there is no pain immediately or an abscess within twelve days.
And then you should renew the paste if you have seen the face of it in water, and adjust it to the severity and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the foot has been made coagulate.
And it is strengthened and supported according to the method in twenty-eight days, and some have recovered in a month of time.
Chapter VI.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Shoulder.
The Tart Shaping Knife is fractured in the patient' shoulder location and not broken from the shoulder but only from its edges.
And when it is fractured in the patient' shoulder location— and it is fractured in the middle of the shoulder— and it is not known except by touching, then according to the shape of the fracture as far as it allows you, prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in all ways possible so that it may be healed.
And then you should place over that powder of flour and egg, and place a cloth double on it; and then place on the plate of thin wood according to the quantity of the spatula in its entirety or just a little bit more.
Perhaps if the plate is concave in some of the locations of the spatula, then do so by filling that concavity with egg, and then place the plate according to equality.
And then you should tighten it using a long handle with a strong grip and the plate held firmly until it is not moved from its place.
And consider the ligament every day; and all that you see it is soft, adjust it again and tighten it equally if it has been moved from its place.
And do not rest the leg on top of itself.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or a month and a half.
And when that number is completed, then do so by dissolving the ligament, and so you may be assured that that is one of the bones whose beginning is not painful and whose end is not painful.
And if you press on the location of the bone with force and keep your hand away from the joint, then do so carefully, and follow what I have said about the fracture of the foot because of a painful injury if it happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Foot.
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle of it and the end of it is twisted, or perhaps only the ends are broken and not the middle part.
And of the accidents of the foot when it is fractured, that the middle part declines towards the broken parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, a loud noise, and vomiting; and is declared to be in its cavity in the bone which has been fractured and not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient' leg be supported on their two legs, and a cushion placed between their thighs; then press the muscles carefully, and adjust the ribs according to two of them, and perform the operation carefully according to what is possible so that its shape may return according to that.
And then you should place the paste and cloth over that, and make the plate of thin wood to float in water, since you have wrapped that in a cloth; and then do so carefully with a tight ligature according to its roundness on the back side, and tighten it according to the severity; and then consider the ligature every hour, and when it becomes soft, tighten it.
And if necessity causes confusion of those devils of corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then you should cut and separate them, and remove the poultice and correct what happens by the way of treatment of him; and return the poultice, if necessary, to it; and adjust the stricture until he is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the Restoration of Broken Bones When They are Cracked.
You should know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large places that join two; and from the ends of them, from the front, there does not happen to those contusions unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden in the feeling of the devil but is discovered by investigation.
And the restoration be such that the fracture is joined by the devils according to the possible way, until it is healed; and if necessary, apply poultice and strengthen the broken bone with a stake, and put it in a sling.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the ends inside, then severe pain and stabbing occurs in the patient, so that it happens to him that he has bled, and because of this the bone is covered; and difficulty of healing, and coughs, and vomiting for some reason; and this is a difficult cure.
And already the Ancients have devised in that way to heal them.
And of them it is said: "Cover him up with food that causes inflammation and wind, so that his belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven out to the ends."
But let us avoid that with him that it does not cause Leichtigkeit to generate abscesses, unless it happens; and if it already happens, then it is already helping in that way.
And some of them say that it should be covered up and kept from wind, and that it is like reasoning: but more, it is feared that the wind will throw away the superfluities to the area because of weakness.
And some of them say: "Cover that area with wool that has already been submerged in oil and let it be between the ribs until it is filled, which is the shape of a ball when wrapped up; and let him be cured of the patient by treatment for pleurisy from food and medicine."
And if violent constriction causes the patient pain that he does not bear, and the bone is covered with a stake that hurts him, they fear for the patient, then let it be said that it splits onto that area, uncovers the rib that has been broken, and take out that.
And let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is great, with cauterization, and treat that with poultice until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then you should cut and pour rosin oil on it and place it over the area, and let the patient be cured with water that covers the abscess inside.
And he is to lie down on his back on a bed, until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the Restoration of Fracture of the Vertebrae of the Back and the Neck.
Some are affected with fracture in the bones of the neck, and also to their spine, and similar to the vertebrae of the back. And if water happens to it and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider, for if sometimes its sides have already become soft and stupified and dead, and those cannot be extended or strengthened; and when you force them with the fingers or pierce them with a needle, they do not feel pain in them, then you shall know that it is not healed, and in the middle of such dispositions, it is deadly.
And if those bones are crushed and feel pain in them when they are forced or pricked with the fingers, then you shall know that the vertebrae of the neck are safe, and the patient is to be cured by treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the back similar to water, and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider the weight of him.
Then if you see that they have already become soft, it happens to those who are affected by water that happens in the middle of them, and when you sit on their back, wind and urine come out of their will, and some of them lie down on their back and urinate and cannot, then know that it is deadly, and do not treat him.
But if such a cause does not happen, the cause is better and less painful.
And the treatment of him is that you pierce into the sedation of the abscess, with oil of roses or with moly, and let it rest on that area for some time until it is sedated.
And then let us apply one of the poultices that is available and existing, and strengthen it on that area with a ligament; and order the patient to rest and be tranquil and not sleep on the side by which he feels pain until he is healed.
And if severe fracture has occurred in the spinal bone or some other cause that is separated from it, then let us cut off the bone; and if the vertebrae have been broken, let us tie them up with a ligature, and if there is an abscess, let us apply poultice until it is healed.
But if the back of the bones is broken, and it is the end of the fracture, then let us enter with the right hand into the ma's chest from behind, and join the broken bone to the other as well as possible by way of a ligature; and let us apply poultice and bend over it, if you desire those, and let us strengthen it.
And if you feel spinal fracture in him, then you should cut off that area and treat the wound with treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the Restoration of the Neck.
The bones of the neck are to be crushed, and if they are broken, then the fracture is only communication in their extremities and is spread out in length and declines towards the ends; and pain occurs in the patient at the area, and the back is stupified when it is broken.
And the restoration of him is that you stretch your hand over him until it is over the fracture which is the shape of his; and here is the treatment:
And if the fracture is only in one end of him, then you should cover that area according to your clothing for some time until it is put together with his natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the long or already declines towards the ends, then you should have the patient work on his belly until he is prepared for your restoration of that fracture. And when you have covered that area, then let us apply poultice to it, and let us strengthen with a ligature on which there is no possibility of fracture or movement of the stelha.
And cover the concavity with water that fills up that area until it is full, and order the patient to sleep on his back or open his side.
But if an abscess happens, then you should stop the extension of him and his treatment until it is sedated, and let us apply water on that area according to what precedes; and then return to his treatment, and strengthen it there with a ligature.
And if they are broken or crushed, then you shall set them.
Chapter .xi.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Adductor.
Adductor is that which is between the rib and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is torn, then the restoration of it is in two ways, of which one is that you take a piece of leather...
And tie them on both ends with two pieces of rope, and hang it up high.
And follow the patient on a slab of wood; and pour [some] water onto the broken limb, so that it reaches the knuckle of the limb whereon it is attached to the bent part of the stick.
And hang it on something heavy to cause a bent, or the servant extends that [piece] of stick in two parts; and the doctor will join the broken part with the other, until the fracture returns as if it were not so.
And the other way is that the patient is lifted up by his neck and the stick bent, and the doctor joins the broken part with the other, until the fracture returns as if it were not so; and one of the servants holds water to open the fracture with its spray, and another holds pus to pour over it. And each of them extends their hand.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you shall tighten it with two ropes on the fracture and on that which is broken, and each of the servants extends their hand in two places.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it should be suspended halfway on the stick and the other half on the patient's thigh.
And if the fracture is near the hip, then it should be suspended on that spot and on the patient'hip.
Take it easily at first, and if it becomes tight, then apply it with care; tighten it a little by little, so that it does not cause a swelling.
But if it becomes tight with care, then leave it within seven days, and place it over a woollen cloth dipped in wine vinegar and olive oil within that place where the swelling occurs, and leave it there; then you shall tighten it.
And the way to tighten it is that you place plaster on the fracture, and wrap a cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm over the adductor, and place your hand on its muscle.
And wrap that cloth and tighten it on the adductor so that the arm remains in place, unless you are forbidden by some reason of the broken bone.
Then use a stick.
And that is because you place over the fracture of that stick which is stronger and tighter than those on its sides; and place between each stick the thickness of three fingers, and the length of the sticks according to the fracture with addition of three fingers of the whole limb.
And tighten it with that tension which has been described at the beginning of this chapter.
And your tension on that spot of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is healing, then lessen the tension.
And if you move the position of the sticks and the tension as well at the same time that you restore the member to its seat, then do so.
But if you fear a swelling with care, then you shall leave the tension and the sticks in place for seven days at that moment which I have said.
And you shall consider the limb in all parts for three days so that nothing happens to that spot of pressure or swelling, or if food is forbidden to reach the member by way of the obstruction of the tension; and then correct everything according to what I have said.
But if you are certain that nothing will happen to that spot of pressure, then do not remove the plaster before three or more days.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his feet should be supported against something.
And place over the adductor a full bowl of wool wrapped up, and consider at that moment of the night or of the day whether there is no swelling nor melting of the broken member, or whether it is soft; then correct it with your skill.
And provide food for the patient according to the order which I have given before; and if the food is not too substantial at first, then it should be made heavier as time goes on; and if it becomes heavy all of a sudden, then you shall adjust it.
It is the custom of the adductor and the patient' back to be strengthened in ten days; and then they are to be loosened, and bath administered with water which will be made stronger by adding herbs; and those herbs are to be adjusted.
And if the fracture is very painful, then you shall not remove the plaster and the sticks before a month or so; but if it is less painful, then do so.
Chapter .xi.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the forks; one of them is small and that is what hurts when it is broken, and the other is large and that is where it is held by the small one at its end.
The large fork is broken when it is very strong, or the small one when it is very strong; and the two bones are joined together strongly.
And if the small fork is broken on top, then the restoration of it is light, and its healing is faster.
And when the large fork is broken at the end, then the healing of it is bad, and its healing difficult.
Much worse is that if both bones are broken.
So if the broken bone is the small one at the top, then it is convenient to the doctor, for the restoration of it, to make a small incision with ease before that is wrapped up.
But if the large fork is broken which is the one at the end, then it should be cut with more force.
And if both forks are broken together, then you shall tighten the joint with a strong knot.
And let the shape of the hand be joined together for the restoration of it, and stretched out on a cushion, and your palm placed on its surface, higher than the rest of the hands as far as possible, and the knuckles lower than the others; and the patient' feet supported by something.
And a cushion before it in height or towards it, so that the work does not weigh on the patient.
Then the servant extends the arm from its end up to the hand or limb, and another servant extends above it.
And then the doctor wraps the bone in place so that it does not come out; and he shall make the best figure of it which he can.
And if the fracture is caused by cold humor, then you shall bring relief to it in its place with your skill.
And if the separation of the fracture is caused by a string and not as you hope for the restoration of it, then you shall pull it off from it and do so according to that which I have said.
But if the fracture is caused by a fall, then you have already read the single chapter of that, and so take care of it.
And if a swelling should happen at the beginning of your restoration, then you shall put a cloth which is slightly hot and slightly cold, and apply it to that spot, and place a cloth which has been soaked in oil with rosewater and olive oil, and make it thin between light and subtlety, and tighten it over that swelling until it stops; and then you shall remove the cloth and tighten the plaster prepared from powder of molasses with clay of honey, and wrap the stick; and let the plaster dry.
And you should know that the name of the fractures of the arm is seen in major situations, or that fracture in one radius or in two radii together.
And then place your stricture on the site of the fracture as strongly and as vigorously as possible, and when the stricture moves from the upper part of the fracture or the lower parts of it, place the stricture a little less tightly according to what precedes the reminder of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And the sheets that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist textiles and not hard or rough, and the thread that is tightened should be of a good weight between thin and thick, thus having remembered it.
Consider the limb to be dislocated for some time. And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, thus when you feel the pain in the member, and then cover that you put the member on water tail within that it ceases that pain.
And then release the member does not constrict within that it rests, and then return the stricture.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is already restored to its former shape, then correct it all with your skill.
And consider more if the nutrition is forbidden to reach the member by superfluity of the stricture, for when it softens that one a little and leaves that one for some days within that it runs to that nutrition, and then strengthen that one.
More if there is not any cause of those that we have said, then do not cover that it is untied within about 20 days or surroundings of those.
Then hang the man's hand for its movement-stirring power and make him sleep on his back.
And you should know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or strong it is restored in 25 days, and all depends on the complexions and the dispositions of virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of Restoration of Fracture of the Wrist of the Hand and of Such Things.
You should know that to the wrist and to the knuckles of the hand such things as these occur with a sudden fracture, and do not occur to them except by sudden motions.
And when it is broken or twisted at the wrist, then have the patient continue to fall and in front of him spread out equally, and then place his hand on that spread out.
Then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor crushes them within that they are well crushed with good crushed.
Then apply plaster and mud, if not put on a poultice; then place the stela on top according to the amount of space, and you have already wrapped that one in a drape.
More if the fracture is within the inner parts of the hand towards the palm, then make a semblance of hope of drape, and order the patient that he tightens his palm with long drape; it should be strengthened with long drape.
Then the stela of leather is lifted up with drape, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and then tighten it according to what precedes.
More if the fracture is at the outer parts of the hand, then place stela above and stela on the outside of the fracture in the palm, so that the hand is open and turned away; and then place the stricture, thus when the hand is rolled to the knuckles with the joints.
And if any fracture occurs in one of the knuckles of the hand, then, if it is the little finger, is crushed according to what precedes and is tightened at the palm; and if you wish, place a small stela turned away so that the fracture is raised and not lowered.
More if the fracture occurs in any of the other fingers, namely in that one of its middle joint, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the ring, then it is crushed and tied with a good knot; or all are tied together according to continuity, and that is best; or place over it a small stela, as we have said for the little finger.
Consider in your restoration that which is mentioned above, and then place that one, the disposition of a poultice of mud and opposite to water, as when any cause occurs, according to what precedes in the description of it.
Chapter XIV.
Of Restoration of Fracture of the Bone of the Thigh.
The thigh bones that are seen moving are broken and it is declared according to the movement in front and the upper part.
The restoration of it is done by stretching the joints above and below the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on his belly and on his face.
Then the minister extend all the joint according to its quantity, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
More if it is at the root of the thigh, then place the joint downwardly on the fifth limb, so that the extension falls on them, and the other joint leaves the fracture.
Then, if the fracture is at the root of the thigh, then make the joint face downwardly, and make the extension on the outside parts.
Then the doctor crushes the bone on both sides within that it reduces itself according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good joining; then place plaster and stricture if any cause occurs for the limb. More if it is in your poultice, then leave that one for some days within that the poultice of mud is given up, and then return to your treatment.
Then the stricture of it is done thus: wrap a hard cloth around the fracture, and double it up two or three times, and remove the excess; and then wrap the back within that it reaches the tail and the root of the thigh.
Then place a long rope between the thigh and the band at the back within that it reaches the outside parts of the two, and then turn those two over the band and the thigh with water that runs out of the cloth.
Then place that one on the thigh in the site of that fracture, and place a stela over the bone of the back.
Then fill up the emptiness between the band and the thigh with soft rags, so that it is closed by the stricture.
Then begin with a strong stricture of the middle joint on the site of the fracture with three wrappings or four, and how much more you separate from the limb at the site of the fracture, then your stricture is smaller and less tight and less moist.
Then extend the two extremities of the rope to the outside parts within that it reaches to the shell of the foot, and then tighten both extremities of the stela of the other part so that the joint is not dislocated from its site.
Then leave the stricture on that one, and so it is not caused for the limb any corrosion or poultice of mud and opposite to water, and if it is not caused any cause of those things, then take care of you in your treatment, and correct what has occurred there completely, according to what we have said about broken bones.
More if the bone is larger than that on which you are placing it, then do so as is possible for you; and otherwise, send it to another place and heal it with water from which the reminder occurs, within that it is healed.
E some are strengthened by this fracture of the hip joint in such a way that they are adapted to them sheaths, as I have already said in the assistant and in the arms.
But in restoring it in such a way that the hip joint is not broken, there will be no walking disability; and if it is restored alone, then another that is applied to it the other leg, so it is necessary that this one walks at the same time.
And you should know that the hip joint is strengthened in ten days or a few less or a few more, and all this depends on the diversity of the complexions and other dispositions.
Chapter .XV.
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Ankle Joint.
You should know that this fracture of the ankle joint is very painful, and it hurts to sit down or get up.
But if there is this fracture, then it is not but a crack or a break in its joints, and that is a great pain or a terrible pain, and all of it is very painful to the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that it should be made in such a way that what has been broken from its joints is joined and united as much as possible by means of a joint or connection, according to what is easy and convenient and expedient.
Then place plaster and a pad on that round stump if it is necessary for him; and tighten it very much so as not to be loose.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, so that it is prevented from any accident that may occur to the foot, and everything is done as much as possible to heal it within itself, until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Back.
You should know that in the back there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the spine; and the other is small and is called the rib.
And there is any kind of fracture of the bone that may occur to the two bones of the arm, and the operation on it is one; and the procedure for it is as follows:
And if we break two bones together, the back is broken into pieces.
And if the smaller bone is broken from the side, the back is broken before it.
And if the larger bone is broken, it hurts more on that side, and it is of those things that you are not used to.
Then administer equalization, adjustment, and connection of the bones according to that joining.
But nevertheless, if the fracture of the back is not too serious, so that there are no signs of danger, and if it can be equalized by pressing it down and making it lighter, and if it pleases you, your virtue will be increased.
And in the back there is no need to operate on the arms, and this operation is performed when you join the bones and make them very light, so that they are held together with a stick placed between them, and they are tied up with strands of twisted wire; those strands are tied to those which are tied together at their ends, and they are tied together in such a way as to form a loop; then take care that there is no tension on the hands, and if it is necessary that it be larger or smaller, so it is according to the length of the back, and from the heel towards the head.
Then wrap each drape in two envelopings according to its length, and place the one over the joint of the back from one side, and the other over the joint of the back from the other side, and they are placed at the back from one foot to the other.
Then tie the two bones in three places of the two ends and at the middle, because with this structure the back is prevented from tilting to the right or left, and it stands firmly.
And a breastplate of iron has already been administered according to the length of the back; and it is placed on it in such a way that it preserve its movement.
And most importantly, you should know that this fracture is very painful, and it is called by itself.
Then consider the back every day and study it carefully, and you should guard against any accident or swelling or other similar causes; and if any cause of those occurs, then keep away from that foot until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the Fracture of the Skull and Bones of the Head and Teeth.
The skull does not often break; but in the bones of the head there are some that break; and in the teeth there is little breaking, except for the molars in their grooves.
If the bones of the head break and those bones are raised up on themselves, then it is customarily said that the patient falls face down on the ground, prepared in this way while moving.
Then place one foot on that which is raised by those bones, and crush them, and join them together according to their places.
Then place plaster and a pad on it, and place the small belly of the head on a little table, which has two flat surfaces.
Then tighten that foot with a strong hold, because you have wrapped it in drapings and from other causes from which you suffer.
After three or four days, then loosen the joint, because you would not be able to see the bones that are joined together, or if they are broken or out of place, and the operation on those is done as follows:
But if any teeth are broken, then restore them, and join them together as much as possible by means of wires and strings, and recommend to you the restoration of the teeth in the mouth. Then place the broken tooth on this little table to which you were recommended, and tighten it very much towards the front of the head.
But if the tooth that is broken off from the bone is two or three or more, then place it on a toothpick wrapped in a cloth, and tighten the table firmly at the back of the head, and let it stand on one of the flat surfaces of the table so that it holds it well.
And you should remember that you should not overlook any cause that has been said to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and keep away from all accidents with that foot.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Fracture of the Jaw of the Woman and the Skull of the Man and the Bone of the Penis.
When the jaw of the woman is broken, then make it be cut into two pieces, and incline that piece towards the front of the head slightly, and let it be held firmly behind.
Then the mother should hold the jaw of the woman firmly, and make it be raised little by little, because all this is done in front of the jaw with her hand; and if the woman faints, then raise the two pieces little by little, because all this is done in front of the jaw with her hand, and if she faints, then place those pieces on top of each other, so that they are not separated.
Then place powder on the two pieces, and when he wants to urinate, remove that which is put in a convenient way, and return it as soon as possible; and if the urge to urinate comes again, then prepare for him another powder, and if it does not come, then place that piece back on top of the other, so that they are not separated.
Then heal this way for seven days or more, because it is healed.
If you wish, take a bladder of oil and tighten it over the hole of the penis; and insert all of the bladder into the jaw of the man, and blow into the bladder with force within the jaw, because the fracture returns if it does not remain filled.
And it should be filled with cotton and left for a few days according to what has been prescribed, until it heals.
And when the bones of the pelvis of a man or woman are broken, then administer the treatment and injection that we have prescribed for the hip bone.
And the right-hand side that is not hidden in these near fractures and which rarely happens, mainly to those for whom this study and use is well known; because that fracture means to you in the major ways of treatment and tightening it, and so understand well.
On the side of the man when it is broken, take a cloth, and put the stick on it; and put it over the wrapping of the cloth, and let it be wrapped for three days or as long as necessary, until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
Of the treatment of fractures of bones when they are swollen.
Convenient is to him to whom the fracture has occurred, and more so if the bone is large, such as that of the pelvis or of the adjacent one, or similar to that, that you are careful and do not touch it much, if the conditions of the bloodletting to you or attested thus far we have said.
And if the swelling subsides, then know that you should cauterize it before powdering it on the skin, and if another cause does not present itself.
And then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, unless there is a burst.
Then if there is a burst of cauterization, then let the restoration be left for nine days, until the burst has passed, and do not approach it on the third day from the ninth, because you would make an accident happen.
Then if the broken bone is seen to protrude above the pubis, know that you should reduce it and draw it in with your hands easily and a little extension.
Then if the extension is not prepared for and out of proportion to the bone, know that you should reduce it with your own hands easily in a certain way; and this instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight fingers and whose width is according to the amount of swelling; and thus it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four, according to the quantity that you require to use in the treatment of any kind of fracture.
Then return it, and be in a small quantity that it is not bent due to the compression on it at the time of the operation.
And be of sharp tip to the one that has a margin in its extremities; and the bloodletting of it to the greatness should be tending, and of the greater part of it within the splits.
This is how it is made:
And it is called in Greek "labra volenz atelarem", which means little plate.
So that the end of it is raised above the end of the prominent bone.
Then insert it into a slot within which the bone returns, and draw it up to a certain equation.
And then strive to draw the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is fine, and do not take the instrument for a good grasp, know that you should cut the end of that bone into which the instrument can enter.
Then if you cannot reduce the bone with it, then cut it with one of the knives that we have described; or saw it with a saw in some way convenient for you to do so.
Then remove what remains in the bone of small sharp points and small scratches.
And when the bone has been reduced, and the pain of the patient is great and burning, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and therefore give it.
Then dip a cloth in hot stinging black ink, and especially if it is in summer, and do not touch the swelling with your fingers or any other cause might occur, so that it does not cause infection or corrosion.
And then administer the treatment of the bone's completion, and leave the swelling uncovered in order to cut it with scissors and wrap it according to the amount of the swelling.
And be careful not to stretch the swelling with the fracture, for if you do not take care, bad things may happen; and fire causes death or severe corrosion or rot, which heals. Then if the tight binding is different from that of other fractures.
And if the swelling is great or is a bad swelling, and you fear that it might occur to him some other accident than those we have prescribed, and you feel pain in that place, then know that you should not wrap it in sheets, but rather wrap it in a cloth of wool; because it hurts.
And when the swelling has begun once or twice a day already, let it be warm, because it is a good thing; then stop the wrapping cloth that you had placed on it with fire, and administer cold water to it, and wash it with soap as we have customarily done to swellings, so that it may heal.
And it is convenient to you that the limb be moved and consider the swelling in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and know that the member is prepared in such a way that corruption will run from it into the splits easily.
Then if the swelling passes more than a few days and is not consolidated or separated from it with ease, then know that it only hinders you; therefore, do not try this treatment again. And of those that separate themselves and come off, those that do not separate themselves and put the member together and cause pain, strive to cut them in such a way as is possible for you to do.
Then if the swelling becomes swollen or irritated, it is a sign of corruption and rot; then know that you should stop one of those by water as described in the previous chapter.
And of that in which you should be quiet and present your question: when the bones are broken, administer it on the member as with the pelvis and the legs, and not assume attraction from it or separation from it, for if it is not done correctly, death may occur; then leave it wrapped up, because a strong bond holds it together for about ten days, or three hundred days. And then heal the swelling if you can see it, and if not, leave it.
Chapter XX.
Of the treatment of a bruise that occurs in the trace of a fracture.
Then this treatment occurs in the trace of the healing of a fracture, and more so if it is near the joints, and distorts the member; and a strong bond stops its natural movement.
Then consider whether the bruise is recent and administer to it the medicines that have stifled it as such, and wash, and see, and smell it, and touch it; and if you take some of it all or all, and if you take some of it in a cloth, and bind it over the bruise in cloth, and tighten those over it with good constriction.
And then leave the tightening in place for a few days; and then remove it and repeat, until the bruise is removed; or tighten it over that plate of lead, because lead has the property of removing all the swelling that is inflated in the limbs.
If the pain is already severe and it is necessary to cut those parts that are more easily severed, then cut them with a sharp knife and cut off what is superfluous and imminent or remove it with an incision, and treat what remains with medicine so that it may be healed.
Chapter .XXIII.
The restoration of a fracture should be done with care, keeping the member in its place and not causing further pain.
When a bone fracture is healed, and the member is kept in place with ligatures, consider the following causes for which it should not be done: either because there is too much tension on the ligaments and the connection is not right; or because there is a blockage of nutrients to the limb; or because there is too much waste matter; or because there is excessive movement at the wrong time; or because there is pain in the body and to relieve it.
And treatment should involve making the patient eat and making his heart strong so that the pain does not increase in him; and give bath; and apply hot packs and pleasure to him.
And place a cloth on the member so that the cloth brings heat to it, or continue to apply warm water to it, so that the nutrient liquid runs and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter.XXII.
The treatment of broken bones that have healed with a twist should be avoided, and the operation of removing them is not allowed if it causes pain.
When a member that has already been healed becomes twisted and برجسته due to the bone being twisted, and it causes pain, but the member does not prevent its natural operation, then do not take the word of one who says that a twisted member no longer exists;
But there are some foolish doctors and healers who have performed such operations on our land; and this operation is very shameful and brings great fear to those who perform it, and they risk their own life with it.
But if claudication and pain have recently occurred, then let them be treated with warm water in which herbs are added that soften it; or with white wine and olive oil, and let it be bandaged with a soft fabric; or with the resin of oak tree, and let it be applied to it; or with the fat of the root of the nettle, and let it be wrapped in cloth; or with a mixture of butter and olive oil, and let it be wrapped in a cloth; or with a mixture of honey and the oil of the cherry tree, and let it be bandaged with a cloth; or with a mixture of honey and the resin of cypress, and let it be applied to it.
And in some cases, it is dissolved with gentle friction that is kept moist, and it is administered movement of the member from the very beginning at all times.
But if the twist has already occurred before and it is severe and has turned into pain and caused necessity for iron to be applied to it, then let the upper part of the bone that is affected by the twist be cut off with a sharp knife, and the part that remains of the bone be treated, and the soft tissue around it be cut, and ease be given to that which causes pain and study be made in the case.
Chapter .XXXIII.
On speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is when one of the joints of the body is moved from its place, causing pain and great damage.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced quickly, because if the reduction is delayed, the joint will hurt and become difficult to reduce;
And therefore it should not be stretched or bent in the hour of reduction, because when some vision is seen, spasm and pain come to the body.
But when it happens to you, then you should hide yourself from the flabotomy of the patient, and let it rest until the spasm passes; and let the member be bathed with warm water and oil, and let it be reduced with ease.
And all of the member should be treated with water in which memory will return to its place.
And the chapters on dislocation have already been read and ordered according to what precedes in fracture; from the upper part of the body to the lower.
Chapter.XXIV.
The treatment of a dislocation of the jaw of the patient.
So the two jaws are dislocated if they are not tied; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either because they have come loose a little due to a small movement, or because they are completely dislocated and are softened at the joint; so that they do not stick together and their tongue does not close their mouth, and the tongue of him wraps itself around his words.
But when the dislocation is small, then in most cases it returns by itself for a little while;
But if the dislocation is whole and complete, then reduce it gently, and do not delay it at all.
And the minister has the head of the patient, and he inserts it into his mouth at the part where the jaw is dislocated inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both of its jaws together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other parts are outside; and he orders the patient to cease his jaws and finish eating from any part; and he inserts the jaw back into its place so that it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and even more so if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporated water with oil, so that the reduction of both is gentle and do not delay the reduction of both at all; for if we have said:
And therefore when they return and are closed up, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then place them on a cloth of cotton cloth, and let it be done with wax and oil; and let it be reduced gently with ease.
And let the patient sleep on his two sides, and his head between two pillows, so that he does not stick to either side; and do not force him to eat for any reason; and have his food be a lion's paw, so that when the pains are relieved and the jaws are no longer stuck together, then make him drink what he wants.
And let it be administered with ease, and do not work on the patient' mouth when eating and drinking and speaking, so that the jaw is unblocked and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then let there be seen some vision, and strong pain comes to the belly of the patient, and strong sweat comes from his forehead, and strong vomiting of pure bile occurs.
And when you see it, then know that it is a loss; and remember the one to whom this happens in ten days.
Chapter.XXV.
The reduction of a dislocation of the furculum and the end of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from behind by its connection to the legs; and some become dislocated at the end, and it is felt.
And the restoration of him is that the patient should lie on his back and extend his legs. Then cut the area with your palm firmly, for it will return to you.
Then place a piece of plaster and dust on it and stretch it out.
May the end of that which you cut be continued until it reaches that place, do not dislodge it at any time; then cover and join it according to what I have said and according to your equipment.
Then place a plaster on it, dust it, and stretch it out, and order the patient to remain quiet and at rest until it is healed.
And in this cure the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter.XXVI.
Of reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, and one of these is that it is dislocated at the separation of the gluteal from the thigh.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the separation of the muscle from itself, and this causes a cramp; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder, nor in front by the nerves.
And most often it is dislocated and comes out in front of the thighs towards the back, and most often in those whose flesh is thin, it comes out with difficulty; but it comes out in front with ease in those whose flesh is thick.
And a great many times it happens to certain men that a blow or a bump causes them to swell, and the muscle of him is swollen with swelling caused by another muscle, and this one has already been dislocated.
Then, when you have put him to bed as you promised, and then proceed to the cure of him.
And the dislocation of him is known when it is in front of the thighs towards the back; but so that you can distinguish between the dislocated and healthy muscle, for you discern great difference between them; and you discern on the head of the muscle concavity and towards the back of the thigh from a certain point to another, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor can he turn it around all over.
If it is dislocated, then it is at the feet or behind; and you will feel a strong touch, and it does not retreat.
And of this dislocation there is a slight reduction when he is fresh and the patient is child.
And the reduction of it is that the servant raises his hand to its top; and place the thigs behind the thigh of him with force in its place, and the servant raises his hand, and extends it behind; and then place those behind, for they return with difficulty.
And if by a certain water it does not return, and only from the beginning that the dislocation has happened, then wait until the patient is bathed in warm water, and then give him brooches that soften and smoothen him as if they were cut nails from high places, and tarragon, and melilot in water, and administer it.
Then the patient should be placed on his back and held with a strap between his legs, waiting for the wool to be wrapped around him that is stretched between elevation and tension, and then the doctor should place his foot on the spine, and raise the muscle by force, and throw the hand of the patient so that he is not raised at the front of the thigh, and another servant hold the head of the patient, that is not raised at the front of the thigh, for it will return to its place.
And if you want, you can reduce this second way: and it is that you place yourself in front of the patient who is taller than him, and be on his side, and insert his muscle behind the thigh of the patient and raise the patient's muscle to its top until he is suspended by air, and another servant holds the hand of the patient from behind his waist. And if the patient is very heavy, then know that another cause may be his suspension, for this causes a return of the dislocation.
And this reduction is only by another way: and it is that a long pole be placed on the ground with an egg-shaped figure at its end, as with mortar, which is not thick or thin, and is held behind the patient; for it is placed on the top of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and his hand is extended to its sides with force, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if the reduction of it is difficult by all the means we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a long pole whose length is twice as long as the arms, and whose thickness is four fingers wide, and its thickness is reduced in the form of the hip according to this figure:
And then place on the top of the pole that it does not slip under the patient's head, and a long pole should be used that does not slide under the patient's head.
And then the pole should be held behind the patient's thigh, and his hand or arm should be extended over the pole to its sides, and it should be kept steady by the assistant and his arm and the end of the hand.
Then the arm should be placed on a step stool according to its width, and the hand should be extended to its sides, and the other side should be suspended from it, for the joint returns very quickly.
And when the instrument of him is complete according to each way that you can do it, and then, when you have put the wool around his leg, a certain quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of flour of moly and egg yolk on the muscle, so that it is rolled up from above, and then tighten it with force behind the thigh with a strap, and leave it alone for seven days.
And when the patient's food is reduced little by little, then wait until his member is comfortable, for he is less painful to heal.
Then the food should be given more and more by seven or eight days, and exercise should be made with a certain movement; and if it stops being soft and does not become firm again, then it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated by moisture that happens to it or by another cause, then know that this should be administered cauterization in three ways, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization before.
And if all this is not healed and seven days are passed, then the ligament and joint are relaxed a little, and the plaster and tightness are removed from him a little, and he cannot raise his arm to its top, know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched out or softened; and you know that the joint will not hold its place.
Of the dislocation of that which is caused by pushing and stretching it from its sides, the reduction is made with a sudden movement and extension to its maximum, until it returns.
Then the other tightening should be administered to it, and the cure of that should be performed until it is healed.
And if there is great healing gravity on the member and delay in its movement, then the patient should use water that is warm and soft until this gravity is removed from him and he returns to his natural state.
Chapter .xxvii.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with great difficulty and often returns with greater difficulty; it is dislocated at both ends, forward and backward, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with a certain movement, it is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch with its muscle.
And when you have stopped the bleeding, reduce the dislocation as much as possible in front so that it comes to a standstill, because if it stops with a standstill, the reduction is difficult, and it is not cured completely; and more so when it is at the back, because it is worse out of all the other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and must be left for dead.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it be extended to two sides, and the arms of it be spread out, and the muscles of the foot be placed on the shoulder and let it be pressed at the joints with their knuckles or within, so that it returns to its place.
More if the dislocation is at the front ends, then return it so that it doubles the hand with its own hand, before striking the shoulder with the knuckles of the hand.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer violent shaking and very strongly.
And it is that two ministers extend their arms, and have that extension of two ministers so that it is not shaken again by the shaking.
Then return the arms far apart, for it is wrapped in a long folded cloth over the hand, or otherwise.
And when the patient touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint with ease; and then press the joint with violent pushing until it returns.
And the reduction of it, when it is stopped on that paste in which it is stiffened and applied with egg white, and is pulled with strictness down, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and left for a few days.
Then remove it; and if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the cloth from it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not strong, then remove the paste and the cloth from it and leave it for a few days until it is pulled out, and then remove it.
More if gravity occurs on it during the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer hydration in a bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause on the joint and let it lie; so that it is not moved again by gross motion; and then bind it, and leave it on the bone for a day and night. Then remove that one, and put it in a bath; and when it is relieved, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat on that relaxed, so that it makes a noise of movement, once, and a second time, and the third, The corruption has already spread on the skin of the body in the bath, but it is limited.
And if you want, pause on that wound of the cow wet and sharp on it, and make it a few times, because that is wet and reduce its movement.
Chapter .xxviii.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Shoulder Joint Between the Arm and the Hand
A few veins of the hand are displaced, and the reduction of the dislocated joint is slight, and the opposite is true for other joints; however, if gravity occurs on it during its displacement, or stops with a standstill, then speed up the reduction of it in an hour when it is displaced.
And the reduction of the dislocated joint is that you stop the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of it, and the foot of the patient stops its own muscle or its palm over the vicinity of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its place.
However, if the palm is already covered by the hand of the patient, then place the two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is before the two hands, then place the two hands of the patient intricately on the table so that the foot of the patient is over the vicinity of the joint.
And if it returns soon, then it is good; and otherwise, then bind it with a paste that stops the bleeding and leave it; and do not repeat this, for otherwise, it does not suffer or can not be reduced after a few days.
However, the joint is second according to its tortuosity; and there is no reason for the hand, but its palm is soft and cannot be strong in any way; then know that the nerves are sharp or threefold, and do not go into it, because if it is strong at the beginning of the treatment, it gives a reason, but if it is weak, it makes it weak.
Then, if it returns soon, then stop on that paste that I have mentioned, and leave it and strengthen it for a few days; and then remove it, and leave the hand exercised.
And if its movement is excessive and it occurs in some gravity, then remove that one with water tail and gentle friction a few times, until it is relieved.
Chapter. xxix.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Throat
Some times the throat is dislocated at both ends.
Then, when a word is dislocated from one of the two hands or the belly, then tighten the word and press the dislocation with the knuckles of the hand or the palm, until it returns.
Then support the tip of the word, and suspend that one from the part in which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend that one and extend it within that day.
Then when you hear the cry, continue with that story, and do not cease to remove it during the day and exercise it by moving it, and continue with that one at night; and make it rigid for a few days until it is strong.
Make a similar thing to that one, if it is dislocated from the belly of the hand, and bring that one to the end and make the first operation with the knuckles of the hand, until it is healed.
Similarly, do for that one when it is dislocated at the other ends.
Chapter. xxx.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Vertebrae of the Back
When a dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and then the rest of the spine moves with it, then there is no cure for that one, because death comes to the patient.
The sign of that is that the ejection of the patient is forced, and cannot be stopped; and some members of it or two pairs of its clothes or both are molified; or a spine moves from its place, because the sign is given, and the movement of those ones to four parts is made.
Then that one has already been thrown to the back parts, and it is called giddiness.
May the cure for him be that you consider if the gangrene occurs from putridness, because in that case there is neither cure nor healing of all.
May the cure for him be that you consider if the gangrene occurs from putridness, because in that case there is neither cure nor healing of all. If by chance or by accident or by a similar cause, already the Ancient ones have spoken about the ways of cure with long words, of which the least returns to profit; I have also and opened myself out on this one for which the few excuses it has from too much he, for my nearness to the thought, my own exposure, at which I have come out and formed an instrument different from that on which I will show you and have made known to it.
And those are not cured except that one that occurs on the two properly at him who I recommend it.
And that the patient be extended on his face on the floor close to the wall, and be extended from him an instrument wet with water so that the feet of him do not slip.
Then a straight stick is placed, fixed to the ground in the extreme of the foot around the head of him, and another stick in the air under the feet of him on the other extreme of the foot.
The minister should hold the stick, and not be placed in a pit; and another minister should hold the other one according to that form.
Then wrap about the head of the patient and leave the little bells to beat around his head with a lion's ferrule; and extend the extreme of the bell to the stick that is supposed to be the head of him, and tie it up; and adjust all the bells and tie those to the other stick that is supposed to be the feet of him.
Then the minister drops down the bell and extends the bell to the end of the stick, and the two sticks and the bells of their places in which they are fixed should not be tied up at this point; however, I have said that we should not fasten them.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until he returns, or that he puts down over there a table, and then adjusts on the table his feet until he returns.
May if it does not return with this form, then a table is taken from which the height or length is in the air of three brasas, and is dug into the wall of which I have said that it is near the patient a place where the end of the table enters. Then the top of the table is placed on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other extreme part, and then extends it in such a way that the spine is pulled and he returns to his place.
And if you want, open the door which is turned with the hand; and it is that you are on the ground the head of the patient at the back of two sticks whose length is a braza, and the head of him is in the back of two sticks only; and its length is between each stick a palm, and it is made in each stick a hole through which run one, and each one is stopped on the ground so that it does not move.
And be also one round stick in which there is the door, and is turned in both ends of the two sticks.
And in the extreme of him is a hole in which it is made the stick, and its length is a palm with which it is turned; and in the two other sticks is similar to that one.
Then adjust the bells which you have put on the feet of the patient in the hole through which it runs, and is turned; and adjust the bells that you have put on the thighs of him in the door through which it is turned, and are similar to that one.
And apropos any door and there is a minister who twists the door with his hand, and the doctor twists the spine according to what I have said.
Then as soon as the spine has returned, and the place is closed up, then put a dry cloth on a table, and then stop it with a mat; then pause over the cloth a table of which the height is three fingers or around that one, and its length is the quantity which takes up the place of gangrene, and over the separation of the spine see.
Then tie it with a bell which I have said, and use the patient for food subtle within that is cured.
And if there is any immediacy in the place at the end of the cure, then as soon as the medicine is soft and clears up for a long time, which I have recommended; and it has been given in that place a layer of lead.
And in some cases the immediacy occurs in the back of the spine of two, and it is caught by that dislocation; and that is the bone which you have already mentioned for that there is no need to do that medicine to him, because it will fort make him die soon.
Chapter LXXXI.
Of Cure for Dislocated Hip
Know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not end only by dislocation, and do not occur in those which occur to the other joints with little movement and concave shape.
And the hip joint is dislocated according to four ways, because it is dislocated inwardly, or outwardly, or forwardly, or backwardly.
And mainly it is dislocated inwardly, and sparingly to the forwards or backward.
And the sign of the dislocation of him to the insides is that, when you adjust the arch of the patient with his back being straight, it becomes longer and the spine becomes more curved than before; and the patient cannot bend his neck because it does not arrive at this place.
And the sign of that one in which the dislocation occurs is to the outsides, it is that the accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
And the sign of that one in which the dislocation occurs to the forwards is that it expands his arch according to completion, but does not bend that side that hurts him, and if he goes on walking; and his urine is repressed and his back is more curved than before, and his walk is on the heels.
And the sign of that one in which the dislocation occurs to the backward is that it does not expand his back, nor can he bend that side which hurts him, and if he goes on walking; and his back is shorter than before, and his back is more curved than before; and the neck of the patient is bent here.
May the reduction of these spices for this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation occurs from old age and age, because it has already been cured with him that you administer a reduction to him according to his disposition; then do not consider that in that one should be done soon.
May in that one in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four kinds of dislocation, then you cure him by turning the joint and extending it to the insides and outsides, and pushing it to the right and left, because it will return strongly and do not require any other cure.
Now, if it does not return in this way, then cover that you prepare minister strong and extend the back of him from the departure put down, or have its hands or am a link what is attached over the back above his head; and another minister extends the hand of him from the behind in the neck which makes the hands down his toes; and apropos tighten that one on the root of the thigh, and hold another minister the extreme end of the link.
And be removed from him or from the departure behind to the neck in the departure of the fork, or from the departure behind to the departure of two.
And be removed from all these in one side that the patient is elevated on his back and that it remains hanging pendent.
This type of extension is specific to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns at which we have spoken, it is good; and otherwise, it is necessary in all types of water that you speak of the own treatment.
In the reduction of him himself, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the departures behind, cover that the patient is raised on his back at its side; and apropos place the links on the root of the thigh in that location which is between the head of the thigh and the location which is behind the neck; and apropos extend the link to its side from the neck to the highest departure of the fork.
And apropos other minister strong takes the hands of him, and tears the gross location of the patient's thigh and extends in the departures behind for violent extension, because that one returns to its location.
And this type is the least difficult treatment with which this member is reduced than the other types of treatments.
But if it does not please you and does not obey to the treatment in all types of this treatment, then cover that they are attached both feet of the patient with a pointed link, lightly, on both toes and on both heels.
And be the length of each one of his four times, and be the back extended more than the other two times by the quantity of two times.
And apropos the patient is suspended on its head and that it is in its largest; and be the length of him of the ground by the quantity of two arms.
And apropos order to a young man strong that it minimizes the head of the thigh, and be suspended on the patient another young man, and the other young man minimizes the thigh with a pointed link, because the joint returns to its location with speed.
But in the reduction of him himself, when it is dislocated in the departure behind, cover that the patient keeps on his back second as we have spoken in the having been shaken; and be tightened the link over the back specifically and over the feet of him.
And apropos two servants are placed, the one on the feet of him and the other on its head; and apropos two servants are adjusted in the middle of the patient' thigh which is attached to it from behind so that the patient does not suffer because the fust is between the thighs of him, so that the extension to the departures behind is not pulled.
And apropos each minister extends in its side, and the doctor takes his hand to the treatment according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the departures behind, then cover that the back is extended lightly; and it is second according to this text about pueg; and the doctor pauses the palm of its hand right on the neck of the patient' side, and apropos cuts it with the other one, and the cut extends to the sides behind to the departure of the neck.
And if the dislocation is in the departures behind, then cover that the patient is extended to the sides behind and is raised on the ground; but, because it is placed on a hard cause, so that the engagement of him is not broken if the two arms are dislocated behind, according as we have spoken about the engagement of his arms over two broad surfaces; and it is on its face and the links are extended, according to what we have said, it does not go down.
And cover that is administered compression on a table over the location which has the joint.
But, when the reduction is completed as we have spoken  — and the symbol of the reduction of him himself does not please you, and it is that you extend two backs of him, and when you see those they are engaged and he extends his back and the other one opens it, so that the wide surface is not broken in any of the sides; and adheres to him with a bandage for three days or four.
And apropos take off the link and the bandage, and compare one back with the other.
And then, if you see those they are engaged in a vestment, it is good that the dislocation has already been stopped, and let go of the patient to walk.
And if you see a cause of softening, then you return and bandage that one, and open it according to your first stretching, and let go of that in three days.
And apropos take off that one, and make that one walk slowly for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter 32.
Of Treatment of the Dislocation from the Neck.
The neck is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated in the departures behind, and in the departures behind, and in the sides behind more than the sides behind, and not dislocated in the departures before.
The symbol of dislocation of him himself is that you order to the patient that it applies its back to the thigh; then know that the neck is dislocated.
And the restoration of all types of him is that you pass over his head to the right side, in the meantime that he already extends its back, if it can do so on him; adhere his two hands to his face, and place the foot between his toes; and apropos make adhere his neck to your hands, and hold those between your fingers above the neck of him with force, and another minister extends his foot within that one until it returns to its location.
The symbol of recovery of him himself is that its back adheres to the thigh with a light touch.
And apropos bandage that one and make adhere the back to the thigh, and apropos hold those for three days or four, and then take off those.
And do not use the patient' walking for some days, until it is comforted and healed.
But if the reduction of him to you is excused, then administer extension with strong links in the treatment which has preceded the narrative about the hand.
Chapter 33.
Of Treatment of the Dislocation from the Throat.
The throat is sometimes reawakened by a small movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the compliment, and the dislocation of him is caused at the departures behind or in the departures before.
The symbol of the dislocation of him is that you see his throat inflate from the departure where it is dislocated.
The treatment of the reawakening of him is of a light recovery, and it is that he is extended with ease to his sides and engaged within that one returns.
If the patient is dislocated according to the condition, then you must make a cut on his right side, and there should be a minister who is strong and skilled in the operation behind two of his sides in his middle position.
Then you must place your right hand on the upper part of the foot, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot in the area of the instep.
Then throw the foot to you with your right hand, and place your left hand on two veils, and stretch it out to the left; and fix the feet of the patient with your right hand towards the back of his legs.
Then make two veils according to what has been counted.
Then fix the feet of the patient on the third veil, and you are in the area.
So if you return in one veil or two according to this manner, and if the foot comes out again, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on him, for he will return.
If it is forbidden to reduce him on the ground according to what we have told you, then make the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and spread a blanket over him tightly, so that he does not move; and wrap a cloth around his legs, and you have already opened the space between his thighs, and placed a cushion under them.
Then the minister of the patient should hold his legs, and another minister should extend the foot to him by its toes or by its heel; and another minister should place himself behind the patient's leg, and the blanket should be placed between his thighs, so that the skin does not move from its position; and the minister should place himself behind the patient's head, and the cloth should be spread under it.
Then the doctor will absorb the dislocation with his hand, and another minister will hold the healthy part of the patient's leg, because the dislocation returns easily.
So if the dislocation returns and you have declared to him the health of reducing him, then take out the cloth firmly, and bind the foot tightly with bandages; and bind the foot on the side of the leg.
Then when you are afraid or guarded from the nerves that are behind on the foot, so that the bandage does not move and is held tightly.
Then leave it alone for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes soft, take it out.
Then remove it after three days, and forbid the patient from moving for ten days. If it is forced to move in front of that space, it should not be taken for granted that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and do not give treatment then.
And if it happens to him an apoplexy, then when you have described the treatment of this disease in our narrative, in another place of cure and preparation, but not be repeated.
Chapter.
Of treatment for joint pain of the feet.
If the dislocated person is covered with a few veils, it should be taken off gently; and if it is not difficult, take it off quickly.
If the dislocation is in one of the two feet, then when you make a cut on his right side, and he moves like this, it is good; and if not, do not do so.
Then you should stand on the feet, and pause the right foot over this one that is in the middle of the joints, and place your hand firmly on it, so that it does not move; and see if it has already been covered and does not appear in the area of importance.
Then pause the lower part of the foot on a table that takes all of it, to which there are two ends, and hold it in place with firm and strong hand for three days; then remove it, and let him rest walking for ten days, but not be repeated and assured recovery.
Chapter.
Of the types of joint pain that are caused by plague or fracture or some other thing.
When such a cause occurs, and you are engaged in the treatment of that person and in restoring him, look carefully at his condition.
And for the treatment of him do not assume that you have learned the art, but one who is wise in the field, long-suffering, merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and not proud; and who uses only the mildest remedies first, leaving the severe ones for later, and delivering the sick person to the divine judgment, but hoping for salvation from destruction, using the alleviation of the malady, and seeing some hope. Then try to reduce him as soon as possible in the beginning of the disease, before it becomes dangerous.
Then if the member returns according to what we have told you, then administer the medicine that causes an apoplexy and cures plague with the water of life.
If the dislocation is caused by fracture and the bones are separated, then you should reduce their movement, and do in him what has been said about simple treatment for him who has fallen; and be careful not to damage his joints.
And guard and avoid according to your ability the instrument in the ways of danger, as it has been described to you; because it is better for you to depend on God's help, and remain firm in his glory, and salute the true king in the true time. Thus ends the words of Al-Bucassim, explaining perfectly the points that God desires. Amen.
