O son, I give you this book, which is the last part of medical science, to complete it as far as possible through its explanations and statements; to me, it seems that I have fulfilled this by writing this treatise, which begins with surgery.
For as surgery is laid down in our country and in our time entirely deprived, so great danger lies in the science of it, and its evidence remains; except that there are a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they changed with mistakes and situations until their judgments were closed, and the force of them was extended and their art.
And I see that I have made it possible to arrange this treatise in the second way of explanation and statement and abbreviation; and because it comes to add to the forms of the instruments of cauterization and other tools of work by addition of the statement, and for preparation of it, which is necessary.
The cause for which no good artisan can master himself in this art in our time, is that the science of medicine is long, and that he has to deal with the actor before him having been exercised in the science of anatomy which brings together Gualia as it knows the joints of the limbs and their shapes, and the connection and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their numbers, and the length of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet veins, and the locations of their sensations.
And therefore say I that a certain name is necessary, small in the work, and more so in the art of surgery.
But we have already said of that in the introduction of this book; for who does not know that we told him about anatomy, is not aware that he falls into error by which people die, so I have seen many of them formed in this science and get themselves out of that science and their experiments.
For I saw a doctor in a book and tried to find out that he had put an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and hit some of the arteries of the neck so that blood flowed from her; that's why she died among them.
And I saw another doctor who promised that he would cure an illness of a man which had progressed much, and the sickness was great, and he came to him and cut off part of the bladder with a bit of the urine, so that the man died on the third day.
But I already called to remove that one out, and I saw that because of the greatness of the sickness and the disposition of the patient, it seemed certain that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a fee of two ducats from our land for surgery; and he had placed a black cast on him which was broken in the crotch of him; and the doctor prepared himself with his ignorance, he removed the fracture by cutting it, about the pubis, with pulvines and needles to strengthen the stretch; and did not leave the pubic area breathing.
Then he removed the plaster according to his desires and prayer, and he left it for several days and commanded us to remove the ligament; and thus, in the end, the crotch was opened with an abscess, and came to destruction.
And I was called to him, and I dressed the ligament so that it was quiet and gave no more pain of his pains.
But corruption had already become established in the member, so I could not restrain that one, and I did not stop walking the corruption in the member until the patient was in danger.
And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess of cancer and it became an ulcer in a few days, so that the evil of it reached its lord.
For the cause is that the cold cautery is pure of melancholic humors; therefore it does not seem to reach him by all means, but that he should be on a member which you suffer all to be host.
And therefore, son, it is necessary to you that the operation on man should be divided into two operations; one in which health is associated with work, and the other in which danger lies in the greatest dispositions.
And I have already kept it here in all places of this book in which work is done by mistake and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep it and not open it, so that the pages do not block your way to speak or disturb you.
Then take your weapons with care and protection of God, and your illnesses with relief and firmness.
Then take your best way through the grace of God for salvation and worthy succession, and leave those terrible illnesses of difficult recovery, and keep your weapons from here which makes you afraid, so that it does not escape you in your faith and in your name: for more remains to your glory, and first and last before your sanctities.
Gualia has said in some of his advice: "Do not cure a bad disease so that you do not have to deal with bad doctors."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered by head, in the shapes of instruments and tools of cauterization, and from that which is necessary for surgery.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of cutting and piercing, and of vacuums, and of extractions of arrows and resembling those, is divided and ordered by the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of cure of torsion and resembling those; chapter ordered by head, in the shapes of instruments.
I will tell you the quality of the joints of cauterization and the important points of it, and in which combination it should be prohibited to make cauterization.
Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the joint of cauterization and the important points of it is long and prolix, and subtle by science, and hidden; and from him a great many of knowledge, and from him they disagree, and for me a little of their speeches is enough for understanding.
Therefore I say that cauterization confers on all combinations universally the same quality; except for two combinations which are combinations of five parts.
In the combination of tail and dry matter it will disagree; for some say that cauterization is favorable to that one, and others say the opposite that cauterization is not suitable in a disease of quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable that a disease of tail and dry matter be healed by the same which is dry and hot.
He who says the opposite of that one, is it not favorable in all disease of tail and dry matter which he sees in men's bodies; because when you compare men's bodies with the dryness of him to the combination of fire, he frightens his own body.
And I say by the word of that man, who experienced this already a few times to uncover it.
But nevertheless I do not cover that it comes upon this one which is already exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cauterization per latter exercise, and has known the diversity of the complexions of men and the causes of those, and the accidents of their own, and the space of the time of those.
Mays in the other complexions, it is not upon you a fear, and mostly in the wet and damp diseases, since all doctors are agreed about them, and they are not discordant in the cauterization of those.
And you know, children, that of the secret of cure per cautery by fire and of the goodness of it, it is because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach but to the member which is cauterized and not to another member with the medicine applied, since it is only a small injury.
But the action of the burning medicine reaches that member which it is applied to, and strongly brings about a healing in the sickly member, and strongly it has a taste.
But the fire, for its subtlety and its substance goodness, does not affect it but that it overflows And I have already known it by experience and by long service in studying the truth of causes; and through this one I am excused from the length of speech And if it were not that it is not legible to me at my own will in this pause to you hidden with fire, and the quality of the operation of it on the bodies and of its excretion by which it eliminates the diseases, with philosophical demonstrative speech, which would serve acutely in your minds.
And you know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the injury by time is submerged in the healing of it that is drawn out by cauterization, and mostly if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer a delay since they are feared from those which come out by time.
And then do not cast in your minds, or children, that this is only the popular belief and foolish practices; since it is because all disease which is healed by cauterization is not suitable at all times, and pause at that consequence.
And the cause is not good in that way which they watch by it, since cauterization is only a place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the causes from which pains come.
But nevertheless cauterization in excess over the medicine by the will of its usefulness and the virtue of its operation and greatness of its Lord.
And it is possible that the disease which was administered to it by medicine returns in some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it; and because it was prepared in its body with the addition of its excesses to its food and the resemblance to those causes; but if the disease which was healed by this is subtle in a member of few excesses and humidities, then, if that medicine for a tooth pain is similar to it, it is possible that in him it does not return that pain, but that it goes away.
But popular speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a harsh speech, not to him who understands it, since I believe that it is no cure which profited by medicine or any other cause; but cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to this; and I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine only when we administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not benefit, and at the end of the cause we administer medicine to him, and it benefits at that. And then from here I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I have of the popular beliefs and silly practices of doctors.
And they say that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and do not say this one but for the equality of gold and its subtlety.
And they say that the place of cauterization does not burn, since I have already seen it and touched it that this one does not burn except in some courses where the others do; and cauterization with iron is good and better than that with gold as they say; but when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not revealed to you, because it depends on the quantity which you want for the roughness of gold, and because it prepares to receive it in the fire; and if you place over it ignitions so that gold burns by the fire, and perhaps in the fire some sheets by which the artisan cuts himself through its occupation.
And for this one is made cauterization with iron, it must be done lightly and carefully on the right side of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those within the chapters so that they answer your questions which you want about them.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on humidity and cold the accident of which there are two causes; so it is a cause of soda and many fluxes of rheumatic fever, called rhagousia, from the head to the branches of the neck and ears flowing, and many sleeping, and toothache and gingivitis, and generally in all diseases that come by cold; so also, for those which are paralyzed, and sudorously and apoplexially.
The form of this cauterization is that, first of all, you command the patient to be evacuated by lacative medicine from his head, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the virtue of the disease and its age and custom.
And then order him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him sit between your legs on a bench that is raised, and place his hands over the area.
And then pause the movement of your palm on top of the movements of the razor on his nose between his ears. But nevertheless, when this one says about the place of your head, it is reached, and then take the olive oil with your hand on that place; and then ignite cauterization in its middle.
And then pause it on the place gently, so that it goes down slowly, and your hand is put into constraint little by little, and you turn it.
And then raise your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see some quantity of hair fall off, like the amount of salt in water, then lower your hand, and if it does not turn to iron, then move it from that one, if it is cold, before you see the bone which I have told you about.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on that place and leave it there for three days.
And then pause over it wrapped in a bandage and leave it under it until the fire is destroyed. And then cure that place with a fourfold medicinal ointment so that it be healed.
And they say that when the Roman plague raged, so many were burned with fire; because it was better and more pleasant.
And they say some of their that is cauterized within the bone, and it should be heated to dry up a part of its surface.
And be it cut off that which is close to the bone, and be it healed.
And they said to me that the cautery should go up to the last, until it reaches the strong bone, and this is the form of the little alpaca: And they say from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
And the blister should be kept open for a long time, and be it healed before it hardens.
But I do not see these two kinds of cauterizing at all, except in the case of a great fear; and let this one be better if it is healed, since the head is destroyed by solution of continuity from it, as we have shown in the other members, and especially when the patient's head is of freckle nature.
And the first kind of cauterizing is better saved and more useful to me; and of that one, and of that work, I am a supporter.
Capitolo secondo.
Of the head cauterizing.
When in the whole head chronic and long pain occurs, and water remains in the patient's head for a long time, and he uses plasters and poultices and salves and ointments and ointments and oils and perfumes, and especially if he has already been cauterized with one type of cauterizing and does not profit from another, consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not pleasant and causes much pain, then cauterize it with another cauterizing. Then cauterize that on the tip of his head with a cauterizing, so that the knot is broken. Cut the knot and expose the bone as much as we have said, and cauterize that in the last part of the head behind the ear - and it is that place where wind is let out. And rejoice your hand in it, and do not expose the bone, for the patient' water causes great pain, different from the pain of all the other head cauterizing.
And direct this cauterizing to its place, for what is more subtle cauterizing of the head's horns and the occiput than that cauterizing with which it is cauterized in the back of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitolo terzo.
Of the cauterization of an old emigrant.
When in the back of the head hard pain occurs, or it hurts within the ear, have the head cleansed with medicine, and administered another cure, which I have mentioned in the causes of the head' water; and does not profit from it, then cauterize it twice: either with acuter medication that burns, or with iron.
But cauterizing with acuter medication that burns is to take a piece of lead, and burn it, and rub the edges of both ends. Then cut the place of pain in the temple with a sharp knife, so that it is within it, so that the knot is hidden.
Then hold it with a stopwatch by constant contraction, and leave it for three hours; then take off the lead, and keep the blister for two or three days, and put your hand on it submerged in water until the place is pain-free.
Then heal that with ointment so that it is healed.
And if you wish, there are some medicines with which I have written in the two treatises of burning medicine.
But the cauterizing with iron according to this method: this is its form:
is called a little peg, because the head is thus shaped in its form as a peg has some curvature, and it is at its midpoint that there is a small prominence.
Then put your hand on the place of pain and hold it firmly  - so that the peg is not broken - and turn the small iron slowly.
And if the amount of it that is dried up by the knot is about half of it, and raise your hand so that the artery is not broken, so that blood does not flow from it.
Then dip the cloth in salt water and put it on the place, and leave it for three days; then dip the cloth slightly under the edge, and heal that with ointment so that it is healed.
And if you see it, cauterize the end of the knife according to cauterizing, and beware of cutting the artery in this old emigrant properly.
Capitolo quarto.
Of the cauterization of an old emigrant.
When you treat an old emigrant with water that I have mentioned in the previous cure, and which is not profitable for the emigrant' water, and sometimes because of the cause of the head' water which I have mentioned in the causes of the head' water, and does not profit from it, and sometimes because of the cause of the head' water that I have mentioned according to cauterizing with a knife, so that it is white, since it indicates on the place of pain with a long line that is half of it; and leave your hand for a turn, and firmly hold it within incision of the artery and turn the knife within it, so that the iron goes into it.
However, it is necessary for you to protect the continuity of the jaw which is tightly bound by mastication, and that the larynx is not broken, and the nerves are not damaged, and do not get entangled by a spasm.
And if it is about the care and safety of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut off, since in the cutting off of it there is danger, and mostly at the one which does not know water and is not studious and is impatient; and leave the operation on it at the beginning.
And I come to mind with the memory of the accident of blood flow of the artery according to your method, in its place from this free.
If this old head does not profit from this cauterizing and the patient' neck is tolerable, then cauterize that in the middle of the head according to what we have said, and heal the blister so that it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cauterizing that I have mentioned in the chapter of stretching the artery by two knives, and it is better cauterization than this, and confirm more.
Capitolo quinto.
Of the cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain from scratching and it is treated with the causes of the scratch cure and with the other cure that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not improve, then burn the cauterizing, and this is the form:
Then burn the end of the knife towards its ignition, and direct it around the whole ear as a rolling wheel or in the circuit of any small part if the pain is there. Along with the cauterizing of the hair of the ear, slowly but surely so as not to burn the place with the tip.
And if the cauterizing of punctures is spread over the whole ear, and then it, and heal the places so that they are healed.
Capitolo sesto.
Of the cauterization of a tumor.
A tumor that is cured and the cauterization is not anything other than the medicines that enter through the blood according to what we have mentioned in the causes of the head' water.
Avoid cauterization by the heat of the instrument, which endangers the person through drying out or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that kind of torture with ablation and purgation and enema, and don't control your treatment, then when you cauterize the anus with three things: first, razing the anus, second, a small piece of hot iron, third, the junction of two lips.
And pause the small cauterization for the opposite of the bad part, because softening doesn't happen except in the part that is healing and becoming healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cauterizer on the right side of the edge of the anus, placing a small piece above the hairline of the head, and in the hot one, whose length should be according to the length of the said leg, and then pause your hand on it cauterized so that the amount of the essence of the wound is burned.
This is the form of the cauterization, and it is special with the knife, the shape of which is facing forward. But more importantly, that little one slowly pours out; and when it comes to the knife in place of unnecessary excess richness a little.
Then treat the area with water that is already cooked in front of it so that it heals.
Chapter .vii.
On Cauterization for Ancient Apoplexies
When an ancient apoplexy is and you treat it with water that we have said and don't give your medicine and the person doesn't have a fever, then cauterize that with four things: over all the hairs of his head; and at the cauterizer and the top of his head, as we have said; and at the skull. And the way of the cauterization is done according to what has been said.
And it is already cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and more later; and then, treat it with water that you have cooked.
Chapter .viii.
On Cauterization for Oblivion Caused by Flame
Then give the patient in the beginning great jerras and pills with a servant telling them.
Then return the head of the patient to the barber who is in charge, and place him on his back with a black cloth described in the treatise about plasters.
Then pause some drops, because that is a way of cauterization. And make it according to the water measure that I have already said.
And then if it is good for the person's health; and otherwise, then do three things on the back part of his head, which are placed from the back edge of the head to the front edge within the hairline. And pause between each cauterization the length of the leg, and then treat the cauterized area with water that has been cooked.
But if you add more and the person tolerates water, then treat the cauterization in the middle; and if you add less, then cauterize that above the two hairlines.
Then treat that within which is healing; and it is the olive cauterization according to the shape that has been given.
Chapter .ix.
On Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body
Then treat the person's head in ablation with jerras and water that we have said; then return the head of the patient to the barber, and cauterize that in the middle part of the head, and over all the hairlines, and over the back part of the neck, and over the two spondylos of the neck.
And if it is necessary for the softening of the whole body, then treat that with the four things mentioned above; and more importantly, treat it so that the essence of the wound is burned out of the body, and support your hand. Then treat that area within which is healing, and let that be olive cauterization.
Chapter .x.
On Cauterization for Epilepsy
The epilepsy is not cauterized, but that kind of epilepsy is caused by flame.
Then treat the person' brain at the beginning with jerras and another treatment that we have mentioned in the chapter when the patient has a great illness and tolerates the medicine' effects.
And if it is a child who doesn't tolerate the medicine, then administer ablation and enema to him in front of water for three days, with a servant telling them; and with good food for the child.
Then return the head of the patient to the barber, and then cauterize that with one thing in the middle part of the head according to the previous way, and another one on the occiput of the head, and over each hairline, so that his hairlines are also cauterized. And if the person is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the things mentioned above, in paralactic position and softening of the whole body over the spondylos of the neck and back.
Then do olive cauterization according to what has been said before.
But if the patient is a child, then pause in a subtle way according to this method.
Chapter 11.
On Cauterization for Melancholy
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted moistures and coarse flame, then cauterize that with the things that we have said in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess of sadness causing melancholy, and the patient' body is moist, then give him water that treats his brain according to what has been mentioned in the previous chapter.
Then return the head of the patient to the barber, and then make it turn gently over its hairline, and then pause it in the middle part of the head.
And the person be sixty years old, and is held by his hand throughout.
Then pause the oiling; and it is more worthy of being a shepherd than an ox. And dry that over fire with moderate heat that he endures when it is hot in his mouth. Then hold him in the middle part of his head in the circle, and let him wait until he is chilled.
And treat the person with water once a week, either with one treatment or with cauterization mentioned above, in order to moisten his brain and equalize it.
Then pause that hair in the shade or in gray-colored hair.
Chapter 12.
On Cauterization for Downward Water in the Stomach
When you have said that the beginning of water in the stomach is declared by the signs mentioned in the previous chapter, then start and give the person water that treats his head, and hold back all moisture.
Then do the sugaring in baths with cold water for several days.
Then order the person to wash his hair, and cauterize that with one thing in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two things over two temples, or from the beginning of the water in two vessels, or at the beginning of the water in a single vessel.
Then apply one thing to all the veins and arteries that are left of the head; and those things are applied at a distance in the length of the temples.
And don''t give him any medicine when he is cauterized; and if you have to give him any medicine, which is unlikely, then do so with great caution.
And I come to wisdom who is in extract of herbs and in abstinence from those and caution from flows of blood.
And some are cauterized in the neck between two bones, two cauterized tools being removed.
Chapter .XIII.
On the cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears of grief are ancient and flow vigorously through the veins and arteries that go to the top of the head and it is shown that this is a superfluity of fluid phlegm, then cauterize it with a cautery as we have described in the beginning of this book on water coming out of the eyes, and cauterize it in the middle of the head and two cauterizes between two temples, and two cauterizes between two bones of the neck. And if there is swelling, then cauterize it in all places on the edge of the eyelid over the brow with a small cautery.
Chapter .XII.
On the cauterization of a bad smell from the nose.
When you prepare and give to the patient three glasses of wine; then shampoo his hair, and cauterize it with a cautery that is half strong and half mild. And then cauterize it with a clavium cautery, two cauterizes on the two eyebrows, one small hair being left between them.
And keep away from fire so that you do not burn it up.
And of this cauterization with the clavium, this is the method.
Chapter XV.
On the cauterization of eyelids of eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize it with a cautery that has this shape.
And if you, then cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little, and let them be long in length. Let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not squeeze your hand too much with the cauterizer, less according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is dried up.
Chapter XVI.
On the cauterization of eyelids of eyes when the hairs are turned inward and the hand pulls the eyelid.
When the hairs of the eyelid are turned inward so that they can be pulled out with a pinch, then cauterize it in two ways, because cauterization or medicine burning is done.
If a cauterization of fire is to be done, then the servant in front should not wet his hair, but rather let it be long and curled; and if he pulls it out, then you should strengthen the eyelids with a cloth so that they are not torn, and let them be pulled out.
Then, when they are curled and curled up, then pause the servant's head on a stone, and place his hand over the eyelids of his hair with a clenched fist, according to the figure of a fawn in death; and this is the beginning of the sign.
And then pause the sign in beggar's milk in an album or peacock's feathers on the eye.
And then set fire to the cauterizer, and this is the shape of it:
And then cauterize on the shape that is signified, little by little, until the surface of the eye is burned and it looks like a leaf of mint, completely burnt.
And this is the sign of health from this work, that you see the eyelid of the eye already tightened and the hairs of the eyebrow already curled up by the pinches of the eye.
And then raise your hand and let it rest on the sign for three days, and then pause over it on a stone, and let fire be applied to it until it is burned up completely. Then cure that with oil, so that it heals.
But if for some reason the hair falls out and the eyelid is softened, then do the cauterization again all at once with a strong fire.
But if the hair is in the eyelid below, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place and curled up, so that the hairs do not pinch the eye.
But if the cauterization is with burning medicine, then order the servant to wet his hair so that it is long and curled up, and then let him be burned with a strong fire in the shape of a peacock' s feathers.
Then dip it in salt water and in live garlic. Chapter I. Take this water, and mix it with both of these ingredients, and make it into a soup so that it does not become cold; and then pour it over the cloth that is done as a shape of a peacock' s feathers, and let it rest on one side; and let the head of the servant be on the other side; and dip that in salt water and in garlic, and then bring it to a boil so that it does not become cold, and then pour it over the cloth, and then dip the cloth in milk and butter, and let it rest on the table for an hour.
Then dip it in the medicine and let a little bit of it be on the tip, and then let the servant feel the bitterness of the medicine, because the bitterness is in fire.
Then, when the servant feels the bitterness of the medicine, then let him spit it out and wash his mouth with water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been raised as it should be raised with fire or with a cut, because he will feel well; and if not, then return to the medicine on the spot where the medicine has not been applied and the operation has not been completed, and has not been damaged.
Then pause the sign on a stone, and let it be burned until it is completely eradicated, and then cure it with oil or something else that heals.
And you must be vigilant in your operation so that the medicine does not fall on the eyelid, and if the eyebrow is softened by a cause of the hair pinching the eye, then repeat your medicine to the spot where the eyelid is softened, and completely do it, and then return to the place where it should be healed.
And this is the shape of a peacock' s feathers.
Know that the eyelids of men are different in size and shape, and therefore your contraction should be according to this.
And do not hide the way to make it for yourself if you want to study this craft.
Chapter XVII.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the eye.
When you treat a fistula with the water that we have described in the divisions of the face, and do not confer your treatment, then cover it so that you cauterize it according to this method: order the servant to place his head on a stone, and let him hold his hair back with a cloth in such a way that he does not move or shake his head.
Then pause the sign in beggar' s milk in an album or peacock' s feathers on the eye of the servant.
And then set fire to the cauterizer, and this is the shape:
that is curved like a cane or a feather of a bird, from one end which is done with the cauterizer.
And if you see it, then it should pierce to the other end. And if you want to come out so try.
But however that is enclosed is better to the whole work.
And approach the fistula if it is open, and take out of it and dries up that. And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from it.
And place over it the cautery which is well ignited, and touch that the patient's hand or the hernia slightly at the tip of the nose, so that your hand or the hernia does not disturb, and then place the cautery on the veins of the foot, and corrupt that.
And if at the beginning of the cauterization pain entered into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization a time or two, if necessary, and leave that there for three days, and place over it with care and wet it with salt water until it heals.
But if it is not healed after eleven days, then place over it the sharp corrosive medicine again, so that the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what you want in his chapter.
And another way of cauterizing a fistula that they first said: go to the place of the fistula and pour it out and place in that crack thin as a blade which is the shape of it: And pour into it a quarter of a pound of molten lead; and if your hand is firm, and does not hurt the patient for the lead to reach the foot of the nose, then cover that with a cloth wetted with milk or water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is healed with water that we have spoken of in the cauterization and cure, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a nose troch of the nose and reduce the fistula to the base of the nose according to what comes into its own place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Cauterization of the fracture of the bones.
Veiled warts may come about in the lips, and more often in children's lips.
So if you cure those cracks with the water that we have spoken in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, then ignite the small cautery according to this shape that it encases:
And its cavity according to the subtlety of a blade.
Then place that with great care in those cracks so that the cauterization reaches the tip of the cracks.
And then cure that with care within that it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
And when in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth it gives rise to a swelling and then breaks, and then it becomes holed, and then it is corroded, and then there is made a fistula, and you cure that and do not profit from your cure, then place that which ignites the cauterization according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then place that ignited one on the tip of the fistula, and if it reaches the fire to the tip of the nose, and at the back of it make like this a time or two; and then cure that with water that we have spoken of in the cure, within that it is healed.
But if the swelling is healed and it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and scrape the bone according to what comes in his chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the Cauterization of the Teeth and the Softening of the Veins.
And when the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loosened, then treat those with medicines and do not confer, then place the cap of the hernia in the patient' knee, and ignite the cauterization according to its shape that you put immediately over the tooth, and then insert into it the ignited cauterization quickly, and let your hand rest a little on that so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And then take your hand off, and repeat the cauterization a few times according to what you want.
And then place the hernia in the patient' mouth a cup of salt water and hold that for an hour, and then drink that, because the loosened tooth is firm and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the Cauterization of Toothache.
When toothache is by cold or there is a burning or biting sensation, and you do not profit from your cure with medicines, then cauterize that according to these two ways: or cauterize on the edge of the cow's udder, or cauterize by fire.
Cauterizing on the Edge: It is that you take a cow' udder and press it on a pan of iron, and then place a cloth over the edge of it and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and then ignite that quickly on the tooth that it is heated, and let that rest on the patient' tooth immediately so that it is cooled.
And then repeat that cauterization a few times within that the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you see it, dip a cloth or a pad in the edge and place that on the tooth, and then place that ignited one on the edge within that it reaches the tip of the cavity of the tooth.
But however the cauterization by fire is that you take a pad or a cloth of iron, and if it is not thin, and place it in the center of it a little thickness so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient' mouth; for the fire to reach the tooth, then it must be thin.
And then ignite the cauterization according to its shape, and place that on the tooth, and if your hand is hot, then make a few times; because the pain may return or persist for some time.
And when by the power of that cauterization the hernia fills the patient' mouth with its edge and holds it for an hour, and this is the form of the cauterization:
Cauterize by Edge: It is that you take any extreme end according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter XXII.
On the Cauterization of Extrophy.
When extrophy is of thick fluid and loose humors that do not submit to digestion by medicines and you see the digestion of those a little, then ignite the cauterization according to this shape, having two open ends so that the smoke reaches the other end, and place that ignited one on the swelling once, and another if you want from that, within that it reaches the tip of the swelling.
And if the swelling is little, then place the cauterization according to the quantity of the swelling, and let it rest for three days, and place over that a cloth wet with sweat within that it cools down.
And then cure that with sweat and tries and bandages within that it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the Cauterization of Hoarsness of Voice and Constriction of Throat.
When the moisture comes to the patient' throat, and more often when water is generated by cold, then it is necessary to evacuate the hernia at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that according to this shape that it encases the vocal cord in its cavity.
And beware that you do not put the cauterizer on the nose or burn from the cord of him, but only a little bit.
And cauterize that with another cautery it must be done at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra. The cauterizer of him is to be held in the manner described above.
Then cure that with water that is preceded, so that it is healed.
Chapter.
On the cauterization of the malady in the chest and coughing.
When coughing and lung disease are caused by moisture, and the fever is not high or there is a old cough, then cauterize that with two cauterizers on the furrow in the place that it is decomposed, and another above it between two breasts; and hold the cauterizer in the manner described above.
And if you wish, your cauterization is to be with the pointed cautery that is called the puncta, the form of which you precede in the application to the pain of the ears.
And make points within those; and then cure that with water, if it is preceded, so that it is healed.
And now the cauterizer has three ramps for cauterization: with one you can make three cauterizers according to this form:
Chapter.
On the cauterization of titillation, which is at the top of the jaw.
When the top of the jaw is displaced by slippery moisture and does not return at first in the hour of its return, you must reduce the displacement within that it returns to its usual place, and then turn the intestine that is on top of it towards the inside of the jaw at its ends with the fingers of your left hand; and then raise the cord that is on the outside of the jaw at its ends with your right hand, and let the cord be pulled back.
And then burn the cauterizer that has two heads; and this is the manner of him:
And then cauterize the intestine within that it enters on the other side; and there will be a figure of cauterization with three heads.
And some are adjusted according to this count, and because there are the cauterizers.
Then hold the pointed end of the cauterizer towards the skin, and then make it adhere to the area quietly, and let the member not be irritated by any time before it is comforted.
And if the displacement is at the ends and it is tight there, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cauterizer or with a sharp cauterizer, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is loose and the intestine is healed.
Chapter.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When there is a flow in the stomach and loose fluids enter it from its whole circumference and then multiply, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confer with them, then, when the intestine is on top of itself, return it by bending, and extend your hands, and then cauterize that with three cauterizers: one cauterizer leave the foot unbound for the quantity of a finger in the pointed cauterizer, and two cauterizers on either side of the two sides of the cauterizer, within that the figure of the triangle cauterizer is made; and make to pass between those which are not adjusted so as to cut them.
And if the depth of the cauterizer is equal to the amount of the three times of the thickness of the intestine.
And be the figure of the cauterizer according to this form, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cauterizer in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cauterizer according to the form of the circle according to this form:
And be cauterized the stomach with water that is afraid of that cauterizer: and it is because you feel on the stomach point according to the amount that you want to try, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer in the points; and then cure that with the cure that is preceded within that it is healed.
Chapter.
On the cauterization of the fret.
When pain in the breast comes from cold or moisture or a loose wind within that it is get from its normal circumference, and if you do not confer with it, then, when the intestine is on top of itself, return it by bending, and hold three cauterizers according to this form and this amount of water over the chest between the scapulae, and let this pass to the bed of the man.
And be the space between each cauterizer according to the length of a finger, and be the cauterizer according to the length of the chest.
And do not press your hand with the cauterizer.
And if the amount of water that is added is equal to half the thickness of the intestine, and it is not adjusted within; and if the intestine is on top of him; and if it is not lying down, then let it be lying down, which has extended its coysas, and raise its brasses.
You can make these cauterizers with a pointed cauterizer when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
And beware that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and let the thickness of all the intestine be so that it is adjusted to the whole cors, for the intestine here is subtle; and know water.
Chapter.
On piercing an apoplexy in the breast with a cauterizer.
When there is a excitement or an apoplexy in the chest, and you want to know if that apoplexy is in the flesh of the chest or in the tunica of him, then, if it is in the flesh of the chest, the intestine has great gravity and acute pain.
And if it is in the tunica of the chest, then the pain is acute and great, and already you are tired with the cure of him.
Then, when the intestine is on top of itself, turn it by bending; and then feel for the location of the apoplexy with an attempt; and then burn the cauterizer that is assembled of meat, the form of which was described in the previous page. And then cauterize with it and with another within that all the intestine is closed, so that it reaches the cipha, so that it heals in ash.
Then cure that with other cures for apoplexies within that it is healed.
And I do not know that this form of cauterization is used except that which was extended in the study of medicine, and at its end there were some subtle maladys; however, this one is to be tried sometimes on this operation, but most of all let it lie down, and it is better.
Chapter.
On the cauterization of plauresis.
They said that the small cauterizers of the Aristotelian rasps are to be used in the way described above, and this is what you take from the rasps of Aristotelian long, and be of the thickness of a finger.
Then submerge that in oil and then burn it at the fire, and then cauterize with a small cauterizer in that place which is between the continuation of the furrow to the neck; and two small cauterizers on either side of the guide, one slightly declining from the beginning that is left, and two small cauterizers between the fifth rib and the chin, declining slightly at the ends; and another cauterizer in the middle of the chest; and another over the stomach, and three more cauterizers at the sides behind; and a small cauterizer between the two shoulders.
And do not cover your hand with a glove while using the cautery, for it will be in the open air.
And already some say that this is done by men who use a type of cauterizer similar to a ray or fire and place it in the area between the ribs until they reach the pimple and the skin comes off, and then we said about the pimple of the foot.
In this hole made by cauterization there is no danger, because in that place it often happens without cure.
Chapter.30
On the Cauterization of the Male
When you treat the hernia of the male, we have already said about the treatment in the division and do not apply your treatment, then make three or four cauterizations according to the length of the hernia according to the shape of the cauterization of the foot, whose image has preceded.
And between each cauterization there is a size of a finger or less, and the way to make the cauterization is the same as we have said about the cauterization of the foot.
And do not cover your hand with a glove when using the cautery; and the patient is lying on their back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cauterizer with two hands, which causes what we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the blade which is in the area of the hernia causing the pain of the patient.
And your elevation is made in such a way that you raise the blade according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
And approach the two hands, ignite, in that area where it penetrates the code from the other side.
And then remove the cauterizer; and there are four cauterizations.
And if you see it, cauterize with three hands.
And you cure the cauterization faster than it has been used for many days, because it is more certain that other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter.31
On the Cauterization of Hydropsia
Do not cauterize in hydropsia but only in a certain case.
When you treat the hydropsia, apply the treatment methods we have said in the division and do not apply your treatment, then it is customary to cauterize with four cauterizations around the navel and one on the stomach, another on the foot, another on the hernia, and two between the ribs, and one on the right side of the feet, and one on the stomach. And the amount of depth of the cauterization is proportional to the thickness of the code.
And then remove the cauterizer so that it does not get stiff over a long time.
And you do not evacuate the male by treatment before cauterization, so that two drops are added to it, and the third is mixed with it, and the fourth is used for the application of the treatment.
The shape of the cauterization applied to the stomach is square according to the shape that preceded it, and this is the one used for the two sides.
Chapter.32
On the Cauterization of the Feet and Thighs
When the feet are aching and full of water, it is customary to cauterize the feet with a little water between the little finger and the ring finger, and to raise your hand with the cauterizer and not twist it; then return your hand, for the water evaporates.
This is the way to make the cauterization: And then make two points on the thigh with two cauterizations, and a cauterization in the tip of each. And the cauterization according to the length of the thigh: and I leave it shorter at the top and longer at the bottom of the leg; and two cauterizations on each.
And you leave the cut open for a long time so that no water evaporates from it.
And you treat those causes we have said.
Chapter.33
On the Cauterization of the Belly
When the belly is sore and wet, causing digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and intestines, it is custom to treat with treatment methods and not apply them, and sometimes the patient suffers from the vertigo of exhibitionism; then cauterize it with a large cauterization on the top part of the stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with a large circle and four cauterizations around the navel, with a square cauterization; and a cauterization on the thin part above the loins, or two cauterizations.
And if the patient tolerates abundant humidity, then cauterize it on the pentagon and intestines, and firmly adjust two cauterizations on the stomach and close to the loins, for this is a perfect treatment for the health of which there is no cure.
Chapter.34
On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids
When there is a nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that infiltrate or moistens the area, it is treated as we have said in the division and do not apply your treatment, then make three cauterizations on the pus between the small ribs and the small triangle, and one above the navel, cutting two dots.
And if you judge that the stomach of the patient is irritated and his food is not digested, and his face is aching, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cauterization according to what has preceded; and one cauterization on the foot, another on the hernia, and leave the cauterizer for a long time, then treat the area that needs to be healed.
Chapter.35
On the Cauterization of Athell Near the Absence of Its Members
When you separate athell, then use a type of cauterizer similar to fire. And then put the cauterizer on athell that is cut off, and hold your hand over the hole from which the blood flows out of the vein.
And make one or two, because if the steps are three, then cauterize each one according to what we have said, and treat those with treatment that is applied, so that they be healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cauterization on the thin part, it will lead to death.
Chapter.36
On the Cauterization of Fistulas That Are Caused by the Nature of Later Steps in the Divisions of the Male
When nature does not respond to the treatment we have recommended in its place, the patient is afraid of it, and he will be healed with treatment.
And when there is a fistula in nature due to the later steps in the divisions of the male, and it is old and rotten with humidities that infiltrate it, then apply treatment on it, and do not try it first, for it will cause pain; and reduce the depth of the treatment according to the front specified attempt.
And then use a cauterizer that is similar to fire. And place that cautery lit on this tube, and according to the quantity in which it intermixes, pour the wine.
And repeat over that cautery inside which are burned those corrupted humors once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of burning of nerves and veins; or if the tube goes to the core of the bladder or to the core of the hernia, then beware of all those places; and do not pour water unless it is in a fleshly place and you think that it does not penetrate.
Then cure the area within that is healed.
And if the area is closed and there are no more materials to be removed, and it has healed for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely healed.
And if the materials are not held back by him, then you will know that it has penetrated or into the preon of his leg or comes from those causes from which remembrance will come to its place.
Chapter .XXXVII.
Of the cauterization of the bumps.
When the bumps ache from friction or strong wind, and because of this the patient's leg is tired, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize each bump with a pointed cautery from which the remembrance comes.
And very lightly cauterize it in two places with a small needle, so that three small scars will come, and then put them together with a quick motion.
Chapter.XXXVIII.
Of the cauterization of the bladder.
When it happens in the bladder that there is pain and soften because of friction and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then you should know that he has a swelling on his penis, and at the beginning of the foreskin, and cauterize it with two needles on either side, and another in the right place.
And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the flesh; and cauterize it with a cautery at the lower end of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And be a pointed cautery according to how it is used.
Chapter.XXXIX.
Of the cauterization of the hernia.
When there is friction and humidity on the hernia, and because of this it causes pain, and because of that the patient's spermatic cord is corrupted, and the cause of it comes late, then you should know that the area must be cauterized with three cauteries along the navel, as was said in the cauterization of the bladder; and another cautery on the lower part of the two sides, or two cauteries, and be a pointed cautery.
Chapter.XL.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When the wet feet are covered with liquid that leaks out of the core of the ankle, and because of this it is clear that the foot is swollen, and if one foot is longer than the other when they are compared to each other, then you should know that it is necessary to cut the bandages from around the foot. And the core of the dislocation is turned inside out.
Then, when you cut the foot of the patient with a circular knife in a place similar to that which is swollen, taking care not to cut it on the outside as if you do not turn the circle, then the core will fall into its place.
And be the knife with which the shape of the cauterization of the stomach is preceded.
And if this knife is not at your disposal, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize it with three olive-shaped knives.
And be the knife according to how much the wound is painful throughout its core; and carefully cauterize that area within that needs to be healed.
Chapter.XLI.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When there is pain in the ankle and it is caused by friction and humidity, then the patient should be given water that has been mentioned before and not offer anything else, and if this water is stale, then you know that it lacks the medicines that are required for this; and carefully cauterize it.
And the way to use the cautery in that area is according to two ways: or cauterize it with burning medicines, or cauterize it by fire.
The second is that you cut it with a sharp knife in the shape of a triangle according to this form, and make them deep; then pour the medicine onto it. And be the space between each knife the quantity of its thickness; and if the olive-shaped knife or large.
Some additional details are given about the cauterization of the ankle with four knives.
And if you wish, then cauterize it with a circle that surrounds the shape in which the dislocation of the ankle is cauterized; and let the fire burn throughout its core.
This is the way to cauterize when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the sock.
And if it extends into the sock, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize it with two needles on either side of the sock in the place where it hurts; and make a point in the middle of the shin bone for four times, a little bit at a time, so that the core is burned.
And if the knife used for cutting is sharp, and be the depth of the knife according to how much the wound is painful throughout its core.
And if the patient reports that the pain is extended into the feet, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize it where the patient feels the pain; and make a point with three or four points, or more if desired, in that area.
And if the patient reports pain on the sides of the leg above the sock, then you should know that it is necessary to cauterize it with a sharp knife.
And remember in any cauterization that you do not offer a fire that burns nerves or causes great harm; and if by accident it comes to the patient's skin, then be careful that it does not cause pain or damage.
You have already seen one of those that I cauterized on the shin bone and the last in the cauterization, and the fire was so fierce within that it caused a swelling throughout the leg, and the fire pierced it completely. Then came a sudden solution to his stomach pain, and death followed him.
And if the pain is on both sides then cut it each according to this form.
The wise said in the cauterization of the ankle, this is the way: make a circle of iron whose circuit is most of a palm; and it should be the distance between the holes according to the thickness of a date or half a palm.
And within that circle there should be another third; and be the space between them the quantity of the flesh; and let these circles be open on both sides; and this is how it is done:
Then let the fire burn within that it gets red hot and makes sparks, and carefully place it on the ankle, leaving a space between the foot and the leg, so that the heat does not affect it. And then cauterize it with three curved knives in one place.
Then let it rest for three days; then apply a paste to it and leave the wound open for four days; and carefully cauterize that area within that is healed.
Diys Albucasis: Son few the cases of this type of cautery that I have used for fear of looking at them, and because few have found those who look at them.
More of these cauterization than the sufferer, and turn away from him that place.
More of these medical instruments than the sufferer, so that you make two circles with a pointed awl on the door of iron; it is the length of the part in the shape of two nuts or keys that these are.
And if the space between each amount is equal to the thickness of this one; and are opened from bottom to top, and that they contain themselves according to this form:
And put your hand over the opening of the anus while the patient is sitting on his legs, and press your finger onto the opening of the anus; and take a little tail of water between the two circles, and the quality of that is applied to the small fire gradually, and endure the pain of the patient for one hour  so that the pain stops.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and wash the tail of water from all the anus with cold water.
Then leave it for three days and put it on the border until the pain is relieved, and leave it for some days, and run away from him. This is the end of the cure.
Then this cure is good if it is cured.
And if the pain extends to the crotch or to the legs, make him sit in a position that contains water according to what is done in the anus.
This is the way of tail of water, and I have already written that in the treatise of the correction of medicines. Recipe water of alkali and two separate parts one from another, and cut them into three pieces and put them in a new wave of which the opening is pierced by a small hole, according to the amount that enters into it.
Then put the bottom of the wave into another wave wrapped up, and place it on that alkali and alive water of two parts which takes it by a day, and then, if you press those with your good hand, and leave the wave that sends away from him the sharp water in the opening of them to the wrapped-up wave.
Then adjust all that water, and put it on another alive cause and other alkali, because that one is strongly aggravated, which is administered in small operations of medicine and in the cauterization of the other members, because operation makes fire.
And then of these medicines a few that are cauterized broad, as well as to temper the fire and mix them with salt on the cause before they are mixed.
And Guilia told of a man of the old people the operation and cure by which is cured the pain of the anus and the sciatic nerve, and he praised it very much as being of that good, and said that there is no need for another cure, and because it is cured by one taken thus as well as by fortifying it, because that man was greatly ill before.
And it is that it should be taken of a certain type of fruit, and if not, it is taken very fresh; and one is trised with a little salt and placed on the anus in which the pain is, or on the crotch, or on the legs, and left.
And leave it for the amount of three hours, or the quantity that the patient can endure the pain.
Then put him in a bath and when his body is warm, insert him into the water, because the pain stops and he is healed.
And you know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medicines but by evacuating the body.
More of Escorides also says that when the vein is tightened by a goat's tooth, it will be better for him; and this cauterization with him on this method: Take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the feet of the foot and between the toenails.
Then take a dry goat's tooth and ignite it by fire until it becomes a charcoal; then put it on the wool and leave it until it is dried up. Then repeat this water, and do not stop until the water reaches the sensation of the pain that penetrates into the anus and leaves the pain.
This method of cauterization is called cauterization by oxen.
Chapter LXXII
Of the cauterization of pain.
Some pains are in the two parts by two causes, by rubbing or by percussion or by excessive discharge, and by those resembling them, by the infusion of friction and moist matter.
And cauterization is not done except in this single specialty which is made by the infusion of friction matter.
Therefore, it is an evacuation of the patient by pills which resemble them and are made on both sides according to the thickness of his body, so that there are as many in each line as there are in his body, because the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the medicine allow it.
And make a cauterization by a small cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauterizations or four with a middle-sized awl according to this form:
Chapter LIII
Of the cauterization at the beginning of gingivitis.
Some cases of this disease occur in small children, and the onset of it can be detected by the development of a crackling sound when they move their jaws; it is from that beginning that the pain occurs in them.
And it begins at the last vertebra of the neck and the bones of the spine that have already begun to protrude beyond the other vertebrae.
Then when you see this water and want to stop it, then cauterize it with a small cautery which is made in the following form: that takes the cautery onto all parts of the spine as one piece.
And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the spine with a small cautery made in two lines or three. Those points are close to each other.
Then this cure is good for the place until it is cured with water that we have said.
More should be kept in mind that cauterization is not administered in gingivitis which is caused by a spasm of the nerves.
Chapter XLIV
Of the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors which infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is a sign that the body should be cleaned with a kind of medicine called podrague specifically for this purpose.
And then when this gout is cured by rubbing in a certain way and the pains are not repeated, then make a small cauterization.
It is because you cauterize that with an evacuation on the circuit of the joint of the foot with a few cauterizations.
Then make this olive cauterization, for which this is the form:
If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a small cautery. And if the pains press within the feet or towards other joints, and it is a long way to walk, then cauterize that with three or four cauterizations in total with this olive cauterization.
And if you feel that these cauteries are necessary for you to heal, then cauterize it and do not press too much on your hand with the cautery, but only surround the skin of the cord.
And if the pain is present in the thumb and also in the index finger, then administer the cautery that we have said in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is present in both of them only, and it is called sugar, then make points on the circuit of the fire as it spins, making points on those two lines.
And if the pain remains in these two, then make points on the circuit of the fire over each finger and over the edge of the hand.
And if the pain is present in any part of the legs or muscles, then cauterize each one from all sides of the aid.
And do not evacuate the patient properly or receive medicine, because if you do it well and clean with this cautery, God will help to heal.
Chapter 50
On the cauterization of breaks/fractures.
When a break occurs in the thighs and you order the patient to leave his food alone for a day, and to use mild treatments so that the wound does not open up from the inside of his abdomen.
Then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and order him to keep his head within so that it does not move or appear, or the intestine or budge.
Then return to the patient's back and try the break on the bone of the spine, taking care that it does not hurt or appear, but rather seems like a circular line from the bottom of the rib cage down to the hip.
Then light the cauterizer in this way:
within so that it is red and gets hot, and makes sparkles. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them; another servant should be on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cauterizer on that mark with your hand, holding it steady, and bring it close to the patient so that you can feel the bone of the spine at its midpoint; and repeat this process on the other side if you did not succeed in the first attempt within the os.
And observe carefully how the intestine moves during the cauterization, so that you do not burn that intestine and cause death or some other great evil to the patient.
And know that when you do not feel the bone with the cauterizer, your operation is not complete.
The cauterizer of children should be subtle according to their age and size.
Then clean the area of the cauterization for three days, so that it does not become infected or scarred.
Then care for that one with the others within so that they are healed.
And the patient should be lying down on his back for ten days, keeping the area clean and sealed from illness or plague.
And do not stop the patient's nutrition according to the length of time for his healing, and that the intestine does not burn outside due to the effort of healing.
Then when it is time to remove the cauterizer after ten days, do so carefully and gently, keeping it for another ten days.
And with hard work and proper nutrition and beverage, and with great determination, because when you use this complete healing regimen, it will heal.
And direct the healing of breaks in other parts of the abdomen as well, beginning with the third part, and cauterize that break with a small amount according to the quantity, so that it does not stop; then clean that one with water, which comes out of the abdomen, and do not tie it up.
And others have said that the first break should be cauterized with a triangular shape of the cauterizer, since it is marked in this way:
And it is paused between the lines that go from the bottom of the break and up to the top, and another line from the bottom up again; but pause your hand with a nail, because the first cauterization is lighter and better.
Chapter 60
On the cauterization of twists/twists.
When the pain is present in any part of the limbs by confinement or impact, and it persists for a long time and does not respond to medication, then cauterize with a pointed cauterizer.
And the cauterization of each member according to its size and age, and its benefits and development, and its location of twist and pain.
So if it is healed by the first cauterization, then it is good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization; because usually those pains are caused by punctures in that member, which come close to the body, so that you achieve with these cauterizations what is needed for the patient to be healed.
Chapter 67
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Some leprosy can be healed by a great deal of cauterization, and moderately if the kind of leprosy is caused by the decay of fire and melancholy.
And so if you want to cauterize that one, consider whether leprosy is caused by fire decay and melancholy, and heal it with water as we have said in the division, and do not go further unless you are sure that corruption has reached all of his body and all of his complex; then cauterize that one on the head using two cauterizers: one at the middle place of the hairline, and another a quarter from it towards the back, facing the end of the hair; and both on either side. And one behind, over the nape or servitor.
And last, your hand with a little bit of cauterization within so that it remains on the bone a small impression, and the scales have been moved away, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize on his own hand as soon as needed.
And if leprosy has spread over the patient's body and appears visibly, then you should cauterize that one with those cauterizers we have said in the head; and one on the tip of the nose, and two on either side of the cheekbones, and two on the sphenoid bones of the skull, and one behind, over the jawbone; and one on each thumb, and another on each finger, and two on the top of the foot, and two at the bottom of the foot, and two on the spines of the hand, and two on the palms of the hand, and two on the shoulders, and one on each breast, and two on the sides of the ribs, and one behind the stomach, and one behind each knee, and two at the top of the thigh, and two at the bottom of the thigh, and one on each ankle bone, and one on each foot.
And keep away from those nerves that are over the skin because you did not burn them.
And some are cauterized by a cautery on the bones of the pentil and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the feet.
And you should know that the more times you apply cauterization, the faster it will heal and the less painful it will be; and you should know that with the patient immobile in cauterization, the body doesn't feel pain any longer because it is already numb.
And depending on whether the members or joints are treated before applying the cauterization, either with a large or small instrument.
Then apply the cauterization with flour of erucous seeds mixed with honey and the other cure within so that it heals.
Chapter .xliii.
Of the Stupor.
When any member is stiff or asleep and is not healed with medicines, oils, and plasters; then you cauterize that stiff member according to the size of the member or the age of the person.
And this small cauterization enters into the essence of the wound a little. Then apply that one with ointment within so that it heals.
And some are cauterized in the middle of the stiff member that goes to the top and bottom, and the nerves that move that member, and it is refreshed so that the stiffness goes away.
No more than this, unless one knows about the structure of the body and the exit of the nerves throughout the whole body.
Chapter.xlix.
Of the Cauterization of Morphed Albaras.
When Albaras is old and doesn't conform to any of the ointments of medicines, then apply cauterization on it a little according to the essence of the wound within so that the whiteness and the color change, and the color of Albaras changes.
Then apply with flour of erucous seeds and lentil mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and sanch of colombo or sanch of yaronda; a little of each is mixed, and a cloth is laid on the area within so that it heals.
Chapter.l.
Of the Cauterization of Cranks.
When the cancer has begun and you want to cut that part off, then apply cauterization on it in a circular motion while rotating it.
The wise ones said that it is to be cauterized with the last cauterization in its own place; but I haven' seen this, because I think that it is ulcerated, and I have already seen it ulcerated sometimes.
It is said that it should be cauterized in a circular motion around its own place as mentioned before, or with a pointy cautery.
Chapter.li.
Of the Cauterization of Adultered Ones.
When any adulterated one is delayed in maturation and becomes excessive, or by age of the patient, being old in decay due to age, or because of time, and you want to hasten its maturation; then apply cauterization around it with a small pointy cautery; and let that one fasten in maturation.
Maybe you want to pierce it with cauterization, then apply the fire of cauterization, and leave that one in its own place among adulterated ones within so that it penetrates.
And if the cauterization is placed in a place that is left alone, so that the body of the arm is relieved; then apply to it within so that it heals.
Chapter.lii.
Of the Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrosion is ambulatory corruption walking in the member, which corrupts that one as if it were eating dry firewood with fire.
Therefore, if that corrosion is in a place where it suffers cauterization with fire, then apply cauterization with a small pointy cautery, and large according to what is appropriate in the place where the corrosion is.
Then apply cauterization completely, within so that you eradicate all corrosion and don't interfere with any cause of Albaras.
Then leave it alone for three days, and apply a compress with ointment mixed within so that all the scars are completely eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
Then apply to that one with a fragrant ointment.
Maybe if three days have passed and the flesh grows again in a healthy way without corruption, then apply cauterization on it again because it will re-corrupt; otherwise, repeat the cauterization on the places that are corrupted.
Corrosion is cured with some medicines sometimes, because corrosion is half a place instead of cauterization. However, cauterization by fire helps to heal quickly.
I have already said that the medicine for Albaras is effective in dividing it, and now take it when you need to leave the patient's side.
Chapter.liii.
Of the Cauterization of Claws and the Rest of the Semblants.
The claws of the bad-tempered patient are sometimes broken, and this is a gross cause, causing the foot to hurt; and cauterize them in two ways: with fire, and with water tail.
Maybe cauterization by fire is what ignites the cauterized claw like a torch, and that is made of iron according to the amount it contains in the claw from the very beginning, and it is refined to a sharp point.
Then let that claw ignite, and rotate it with your hand near the fire so that the cauterization reaches its depth. Then leave it alone for three days within so that it starts to burn the arm. Then apply ointment on it with dried sea-weeds cut into three pieces, and leave the ointment on that one for a new thing, because it eradicates its roots.
Then apply to that place with a fragrant ointment generated within so that it heals.
If it doesn' convert, and sometimes it happens on the surface of the body, mostly on the hands and feet; then, when you apply cauterization with water tail, a little amount at a time, and rotate your hand; let that water fall slowly into the claw'a hole a little at a time, and return your hand, and now turn that one with a compress of your hand from top to bottom, and plug the edge of the claw'a hole with the compress, and wait for the patient' arm to stop biting the water tail; then remove that one.
And then apply to those ones again until you go over all of them in the body.
Then apply ointment on those places where the claws were to eradicate any infection with water of the ointments that the flesh generates in the body.
Chapter.liiii.
Of the Cauterization of Tremors.
When there is a tremor that bites the nerves or due to fever from scratching, or similar causes; then, when you apply cauterization to that one with four cauterizations or five on the spine between each spine with a cautery; and one cauterization on the feet, and another on the stomach, and another on the back, and another on the neck.
And the tremor of that patient is relieved, and the healing begins quickly because of the fever.
Chapter.lv.
Of the Cauterization of Unintentional Injuries to the Body.
When in the body there appear white spots and pustules that are formed from corrupted thick matter; therefore, at first sight of these, it should be cauterized over all the fistula with a gentle cautery made with a mirth stalk, its extremities being spread with fire; or with long erestology; or with lente-cautery.
And some veins are cauterized at the beginning of their discharge according to this manner; and they are not widened, and the surplus fluid is stopped by doing so, and cured from that.
But however, it should be done that this is done with a fluid drainage.
Chapter LVI.
Of the cauterization of a fluid flow from an accident by incision of an artery.
Trous veins that flow by incision of an artery must be cauterized or incised at the root, or cauterized at the root of the apotheosis or cautery of the member, and then it is difficult to repair them.
Therefore, if it happens to anyone that there is a flow of fluid, then hold your hand over the root of the artery with your thumb at its opening, and stop that fluid from flowing from under your thumb, and do not let it go.
Then return the gentle and large fire cauterizations to their place, for many reasons, and exhale over them until they are ignited.
Then take one of these, small or large, according to the location and the injury where the artery is broken, before you repair it, and cauterize that vein within that has been cut and stop the flow of blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the artery's opening when you repair it and expel the cautery, then take another cauterization that has been prepared in the fire, and do not cease to make a small cut within that the blood may flow through it.
And guard that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that fire does not come upon the patient's thigh or another evil.
And you should know that when an artery bleeds, it is impossible to stop the bleeding in those places and especially so if the artery is large, unless one of four ways: or cauterize with this manner as I have said, or extract when not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him burn and the blood is stopped from flowing, or that it is tied with a knot or ligature by strong tension, or that it is placed on medicines from which the virtue is drawn to stop the bleeding; and they are tightened on the palm of your hand.
But that which is administered with careful tension or tight pressure does not confer anything but fire and pain.
But if it happens to anyone that there is a flow of fluid and it is not the present medicine or remedy, then open the pause of the index finger on the opening of that vein as I have said, and understand with great tension of the inside that stops the blood from the root of the injury, and over the artery do not repair it; and, above the artery, spray with cold water in a way that the wound is cooled and thickened; and further burn with fire or with medicine if there is need.
Of incision, piercing, vents and drainage, and of blisters and their resemblances.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness that requires fire and fire cauterization and when and why and what instruments are convenient for it, and these chapters of the sub-heading of the head within the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter according to that method, so that what is desired may be obtained, and then on that which has been desired; for it is difficult to obtain it.
Before I began with this, let me tell you, dear sir, that I will tell you in this chapter what is frightening for your benefit; the first chapter was about the cauterization of fire.
And for your benefit, let me tell you that in this operation, there are many ways to avoid danger; because when it is necessary to cauterize or incision at the root of an apotheosis or open a pustule or clean out a wound or extract a arrow or cut off hair and its resemblances. And of all these, fear and trembling accompany them, and at the most they bring death with them.
And I warn you that it does not happen to you what happened to others; for some of them, there were ways in which they fell ill because of the behavior of others' illnesses. And of them some died very quickly from their illness and were not afraid of it; and others died slowly from their illness and from its duration and from the illness which was causing death.
And of them is the one who gives you hope and comfort, hoping for their health, but their illness is pernicious.
And so I do not agree that you consent to this behavior towards you which is this manner; and your caution be greater than your fear and your haste; and do not assume any cause against you except a certain science that certifies it, to which the success of glorious praise belongs.
And use in the treatment of all your illnesses by prediction and indication of which is saved, for in this it is helped to you regarding acquisition of fame and memory, glory and praise.
Or, children, God gives you his understanding and does not leave you alone in your direction and protection, for it is in him.
And I will proceed with this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauterization, of the care of the head within the feet, so that what you desire may be obtained from it and for which you have needed.
Chapter one.
Of the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
You should know that this illness appears to children, when the child is born and when the head of the child becomes light.
And some appear to be due to hidden causes that are not understood.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and all those whom I saw died quickly, and so it seemed to me that a worthy work was performed in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head remained as it was, until fire killed him; and more than that the humidity increased within that fire killed him.
And this moisture or is added between the nose and the jaw, or is added above the jaw over the chin.
Because the operation in this is that if the moisture is between the nose and the jaw and the apotheosis is little, then you open at its place in the head with a crack in its depth; and let the length of the crack be two inches within that it runs water, and this is the shape of the spittle:
And if the moisture is increased and the apotheosis is larger, then there are here two cracks according to this manner:
And if the moisture is above the jaw, then it is a sign that you open the comissures of the head completely and squeeze out water when you compress that with your hand at its depth; and it does not happen to you what has happened. Then cut the middle of his head into three parts according to this method:
Then remove all the moisture with a scraper; then stretch the openings with cloth and feathers; then sew it up again with thread, oiled and soaked in water on the fifth day, and then tie the head back into place and care for the wound with wet bandages and apply ointments, then make sure the head is equal and healthy before feeding him dry food with little moisture until the member has recovered and healed.
There is another way to make the incision, which you consider appropriate for the size of the abscess and the amount of fluid: some are better in the occipiti, or on one side or the other; so make the incision where the abscess appears and where the fluid collects, and pour water as quickly as possible.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause a sudden flow of blood, which could kill the patient with such a loss of blood; let him evacuate the moisture slowly.
Chapter II.
When there is a cough or fluid in the lungs or feet, and it has been treated with water, and this treatment does not work, then do the final treatment by making an incision between those two arteries.
And when you want to make an incision where the patient's hairline is, and rub the area with an abrasive cloth so that the veins appear, and put a strong cloth around the head; and consider the place of the pulse; and the areas next to those at the ears are cut in some people but hidden in others.
And then stretch the vein out; and make an incision on each side from above toward the bottom, going deep into the bone, and pour water by the length of the head.
And if you want to, insert a blade between the artery and the incision on the sides.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width apart, for when a vein is cut, the pulse jumps and stops frequently because it jumps often.
Except if the vein is not felt when pressed, then cut where there is a space of three fingers between the ears, and stretch it out.
So that the amount of water is equal to the quantity of blood. And so stretch it out by holding it up in the air as much as or more than the amount of blood that appears from the virtue of the patient and the amount of fluid in the vein.
And then consider the pulse; if there is a cause of ha (not sure what this means), then cut it out carefully so that there is no abscess.
And then stretch the pulse with feathers and a cloth drape, and then care for it with bandages until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of excising veins that are in the temples.
When there is a headache that is either due to the loss of fluids and quality in the air of the temples, or it is a violent and similar pain to those, and it has been treated with medicine and water but has not responded, then we turn to this treatment for removing the veins from the temples, or cauterizing those veins.
And the way to operate and extract those is that the patient shaves the hair from the temples; and consider the vein that appears in the temple because it is shown by the pulse, and it is hidden in a few people due to its speed.
And if it is hidden from you, then the head of the patient is strengthened with a cloth; and rub the area with an abrasive cloth or evaporate the moisture with water, so that the vein appears clearly to you. Then take this spike: And then pull the vein out with this ease, until you reach the artery; and cut it out separately from the top, until you extract that from the spike, and discover that of the tunic which covers that one, completely.
Except if the artery is thin, then wrap it at the end of the finger, and cut it from one side according to the amount by which the extremities are longer and shorter, and do not allow a flow of blood, because if they are not cut, the blood will not flow completely.
And then empty the blood with water. From one to three.
If the artery is large, then cut it into two pieces with a double-edged blade or a strong string, and do not allow it to break; otherwise, the blood will flow.
And then cut off the surplus that is between two cloths; and pour it out at that time or another time.
And if you want to, cauterize that vein with a knife within the bone until the extremities are incised, and place that in a safe place.
It is better work than the patient having a fever or being in a cold state of complexions; because cauterization is of those causes that help end moisture, so it is better to use cauterization with caution.
And then extract the veins from that place where they were cut with care; and lay a dry cloth over them, and cure it with dry medicine so that the flesh heals and the fluid goes away until it is completely cured.
And if, while you are opening another vein that is bleeding, then stop that blood from flowing; or with cauterization, or by putting something in the place of cut: strengthen your hand until the blood stops. And if any of those causes are not present, then pause the time-wasting over the area until the blood stops hurting, and place it in cold water that is very fast; and strengthen it as much as possible.
And for the extraction of veins, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterization, having two knives; because you have covered those two areas with care, and pause all, fire ignites, until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that water flows between the extremities, because they are not consolidated completely by this cauterization.
And this is the form of cauterization:
The edge of both knives is sharp. But however, if the sharpness of two knives is better because it suits each one to cut quickly, and you do not cut the flesh with speed.
So that in those where there is some roughness, the fire's heat is held in them and the flesh is gently cut off.
This work is better than any other work and lighter.
And be the space between those two knives the amount of the thickness of the knife.
Chapter IV.
Of the treatment for sharp and sour tears in the eyes.
When it is sour tears, and the cause of that treatment is not in water; then the face of the patient becomes red, and walks like someone who is walking with ants, and his eyes become dry as if they were filled with dust, and the eyelids are scratched by the acidity of the tears, and they do not need this treatment for those operations, and they do not respond to it.
And it is that you command the patient to remove his pubic hair from the front of his body, and then cut three slits evenly spaced according to the length of his forehead. And if the length of the slit falls two times: the first slit is evenly spaced according to the length of a nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second slit follows the length of a small movement of the eyelashes that are on the eyelid, and the third one from the other side.
And keep your hand away from the incisions of the arceaux that are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is three times the size of a finger.
And to you there is a piece of sponge or dry rags that are used to absorb the blood from the wound.
Then introduce the spatula's two sharp ends, and this is the shape of the incision for him: which is from the start of the temples to the second incision. And cut off all the cartilage that is between two incisions on the nose, and then do so from the middle incision to the second one. Then take this spatula and introduce it into the first incision. Another instrument called a chisel is taken, from one side and not on the other side.
Then pause the layers of that from underneath the cartilage, and the layer of him is cut in two places, and then it is closed with a thread from where it comes out to the middle incision, and then cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the throat.
May it be continued until it is finished; cut off all of the cartilage and then do so from the middle incision to the other one.
And put there a quantity of blood that matches the size of a finger; squeeze the blood vessels of the nose with ice.
Then pause in each slit a little piece of velvet, and place it on the dust that is mixed with oil and vinegar and honey; let it not form pus.
And on the third day remove the ligature and give a large infusion of cold water or tar, and then treat it with oil of roses and other things so that the plagues are healed.
Chapter.v.
Of the cure of ulcers by cauterization and to the vessels that descend from the insides of the head.
When in the blood there is a hot cauterization and it continues, and sometimes the small vessels of the patient are exhausted; already, regarding their recovery, their eyelids can be weakened, and their hair can fall out, and in the forehead there is an acute pain that stings and pulls out, then know that these accidents do not come from the blood vessels that descend from within the head.
And the best cure for them is this: command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut a slit in the middle of it, a little one according to its length (and start cutting at the temple on the left side, cutting into the bone; and extend your hand from the eyelashes that are above it); then expose the bone.
Dry all the nose with sponge or dry cloth and then put between the two lips of the incision a piece of velvet or cloth. Then wipe off the dust that is mixed with oil and vinegar from it, so that it does not form pus.
And when the blood has stopped and you see that the pus has decreased, then know that you take two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together so that it becomes a paste; and administer this to these pla
Chapter.vi.
Of the cure for water in the ears.
All causes that cause water in the ears are four species: either it is mineral which seems like plant, so that it ferments and makes sound, or it is of a plant, so that it causes fever, or it is fluid-like, whether water or vinegar and oil, or some animal.
And when it is a plant that causes water in the ear or some other similar cause to those causes that do not match, and then pause the ear towards the sun, and if the water still exists, then distil it into oil of violets or sesame oil, and then administer the extract; and let the person sneeze at a particular time, and put the nose in the direction of the sneezing. Then pause the ear with some cloth or wool, and extend the ear towards the outside, for blood vessels that are visible can be cut.
If it is not caused by the sun, then administer the extract with the instrument called a gentle epicyte, whose form is as follows:
And if it is caused by the sun, this is good; otherwise, administer the extract with one part of soft paste.
And if it is not caused by water, then make a tube of aram; introduce the end of the tube into the ear canal and stop up its other end with wax and soft oil so that it does not leak but stays within the tube. Then extract it with a small wind, for four visible vessels with water that we have mentioned.
May it be that if it is not caused by the sun in this way, then take a piece of silver or gold and cut off a small amount; pause it on the edge of the ear with a little wax, and then wrap it around it properly. Then introduce that in the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And if it is not caused by the sun with all the causes that we have mentioned, then command the patient to stop eating and drinking anything that can cause pus or spasm.
And the way to cut that off is this: command the patient to stop eating at the beginning of the meal and extract blood from the nose according to the virtue of it, and then put that between your two hands and turn it over, turning the ear towards the outside, turning it into a small slit in the root of the ear, smearing its skin with oil. Let the slit have the shape of the moon and it reaches the water, and when the water is caught, then stop it with an appropriate instrument; and let that be closed quickly, and heal it.
If the cause that enters into the ear is one of the greases that cause it to swell and become inflated, then administer the cure and extract; but if you do not obey me in anything, then take a piece of thin bone according to this form: And then administer to that the removal of that grease that entered into the ear.
Do not let water escape from your thought that it has already become damp with the vapor of the ear, and then pause it in a piece of cloth; and extract it with one part of soft paste or with a gentle epicyte, and then close it properly; for the extraction is a relief.
May the water that enters into the ear be used by the patient for sneezing at a particular time, and fill his ear with a little bit of wool, and if it is not caused by the sun, then take two small pieces of straw or hay according to its length, and burn them in a fire slightly; and let the patient sneeze on one piece of straw while holding another in their hand. Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been drained.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been drained. And already the water has been drained completely except that you take of paper or of a kind of cloth, i.e., and place one end of it in the patient's ear and extend the other end towards a fire until half of it is burned.
And then place another cloth and make so much water run through it until all the water has been drained, and then attach it to a tube that is connected to the drainer of the pus.
But if the animal needs to be killed to extract it, then do so with a sharp tool and cut it, and the cause of it is easier than all the other causes that are found in the ear.
But if the verm is generated in the ear, when you have finished treating it with water as mentioned above and in the book of distillation, then take care not to look at the ear towards the sun.
And if there is any cause of the worms, then extract it with a sharp tool or a fine needle, but if there is no cause, then take a narrow tube and connect it to a wide one from which this is the form of it: And insert the narrow end into the ear according to the quantity that it suffers pain, and then draw out with a strong suction, and make small drops of water, so that all the worms are expelled.
But if you do not obey the above instructions, then you should take care and close the tube with wax as mentioned above; then administer the distillation that has already been distilled in the treatment of worms, and look at the water in the distillation book.
And be your effusion with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, from which this is the form of it: and make it narrow and in the shape of a tube, with a small hole on top.
And thus, if it is necessary to insert something into the cavity of the tube where it needs to go. And if you wish, take a piece of string and wrap it around the end of it neatly, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or water that you want from these medicines in the tube  and this is in the ear , and then insert the string with the oil into the ear, and squeeze your hand on it to force the oil out into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
and that water which is poured into the ear is already burned a little with fire. And take care that the cause that you will distil in the ear is not too much rubbed, for ear medicines do not suffer from water.
Chapter VII.
On the Treatment of Ear Aches.
Some children born of their mothers' wombs do not perforate, and water does this to them in some cases in the meat of the ear because of a plague or because of flesh there; and this ache sometimes occurs in the middle part of the ear trail, which does not see the ear canal, and sometimes it is found in the outer parts.
And that ache which occurs in the middle part of it, which does not see the ear canal, is in difficult cases of difficult cure.
And in that one in which you can see the ear canal, take care to turn the patient's ear away from the sun and look at it. But if there is any obstruction seen, open that with a fine needle from which this is the form of it:
If the end of it is small in size, of which one side is sharp and the other not; and the needle is made of two sharp edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
But if the ache is caused by hidden flesh in the ear or in its meat, then cut it with a sharp needle and apply that violent ease slowly until all the flesh is removed.
But if the ache is in the middle part of the ear, then take a fine needle and burn it slightly with fire, and then put it into the meat of the ear.
But if you have felt any obstruction with water that the patient feels with ease, then apply pressure to it with ease; and take care not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place a cloth of the second quantity of the width of your finger that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment on the ear; and make water for several days until you are sure of the solidification of the plague, or you can take some oil and dip it into cotton wool and spray it onto it and rub it; and if the ear is already infected, then take care to destroy the oil and replace it with another that you have wrapped in wax which is made of rose oil, so that the pustule is allowed to heal.
But if a fever occurs, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and rub it on the ear, and use another treatment that is mentioned in the book of distillation to stop the flow of the fever, which is called "distillation".
Chapter VIII.
On the Treatment of Aches that Cause Blinking.
Aches that cause blinking in some children are wet and in some they are dry.
But if you have any that are hard and some that are soft, and cut these with a needle and place them on the edges of three-sided places.
But if there is a flow of fever with pain, then you should cauterize those that are close to the ear with subtle cold fire.
And the best cauterization is that the wounds and the wounded places are returned when there remains any cause of them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those wounds are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
On the Treatment of Blisters on the Eyes of Children.
Blisters that form on the eyelids of children are caused by any cause that is gathered in strength and hardness, and the larger they become, the more painful they are called.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the inner eyelid and from above.
Then the operation in them is that you should consider if the larger one appears on it in any way and extends to all parts; and the cause of it is hidden.
Then pierce that with a needle from the edge, and then cut it from all parts with ease until it is removed, and then put a needle into it and tie it up.
But if the wound is large, then you should patch it up with sutures; and heal that within a short time.
But if it is small, you will not have any trouble with that, because the blood of it restores it and heals it.
But if the larger one is declining in the inner parts of the eyelid, then lift the eyelid and suspend the larger one with a needle, except that you do not cut it open, and cut it from all parts, and if the eyelid by incision becomes longer, then there is no cause seen.
And then make an incision, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the wound with water that swells up inside until it heals.
Chapter .X.
Of the cure for a blister on the eyelid.
Axcirnah is grays that is generated in the tunics of the eyelid, and mostly in children, it aggravates blisters on them and causes their discharge; and they cannot face the clarity of the sun because tears run to those.
And so you may often see them on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and their eyebrows are moist, which has already been covered with swelling, and the beginning of discharge appears in it; and when you press the wound with your fingers, you feel the discharge inside.
And a way of operation is in that the patient holds his head back on his neck and another person ties him up and makes a hole, and makes a circle according to the amount that contains arthernach from the whole beginning, and places that above this and presses it with fingers, so that the discharge of arcernac in the middle of the circle is gathered, and then breaks into the middle of that humidity with a sputum that does not have a larger hole than the one made by flabotomy.
May the incision be completely covered so that you reach the arthenach, because in the lower positions arthenach is discharged through a crack according to the shape of white blisters.
Then remove that with the drapes you have wrapped between the fingers on both sides at the front and turn it over between the right and left hands until it is completely removed.
And keep that you do not adjust in the crack so that the sputum does not reach the wound and burns you.
May if your arthenach does not appear at the beginning of the crack, may you adjust in the crack a small one within which it processes arthenach; and then remove that as I have said; and then return drapes to water and rub and place them on the wound and sprinkle them with dust.
And so that they grind salt and put it in the cavity of the crack so that the water that is left of that humidity is dried up.
And then cure that within until it heals.
May if an abscess is found in the wound, then cure that with plasters of cedar within until it heals.
Chapter .XI.
Of ways to treat a wound.
When, in the eyelids of blisters, the natural hairs are cut off and they become dry, then those noose on the wound and make a way for malady like this with frequent tears and moistening of the eyelids and canvas within until it is the cause of the destruction of the wound that is called touch-injury, and is cured in four ways: or by cauterizing with fire; or with acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter of cauterization; or it is done atactingly by incision and stitching; or with knives according to what eye hurts.
And so you may often see them on their faces all the time, and on your left hand place the patient's head; if it is turned, that is good; and if not, insert an awl into that in which it is faithful to the beginning from the edge of the eyelid, and make the awl go through it, and so  near the margin of the eyelid where there are no hairs  near the hairs, and pull the awl up towards the edge with your left hand, and turn that towards you.
And then break into the inner part of the eyelid where the natural hairs are inserted with a spatum that is turned by the lacrimal major into the lacrimal mendre; and then remove the awl and leave the edge of the eyelid moistened with small pieces of grass or drap, and then press it over the eyelid with your thumb, and be like this with a figure of a leaf.
However, it is good that the figure is according to the amount of helevatio of the eyelid, because each person has different shapes of his eyelids, because some have a small amount and others a large one, according to which the eyelid is moistened.
And then break into the spatum on the two lines you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal mendre. And if your crack is near the natural hairs like this with its thickness.
And then place the awl in one of the two angles of the incision, and then scrape that completely, and then adjust with a sharp knife or a thread-like rope, and wipe the blood, and make adhere what is surplus of the threads on both eyebrows for some enigmatic causes, if you want to do so, and if not, do not cure it.
And then leave the stitching of the threads within three or four days, and then cure that.
And if you want to, leave the patching without stitching, and cure that with water that dries it up and tightens it because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the patch and the aggregation of it; but it is better to stitch it. And so I have said about the ancient remedies of taxanir.
However, if it is a solicitous place on the patient, it is good work, and it is not in fear.
And it is another way of sewing on, and that you mark over the eyelid a figure like this with a leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three separate and gathered threads according to this shape:
May if it is not possible here, hold the needles, and if the thread is not tied, then take a awl that has thread on it, and insert it in the middle of the figure, and enter the other one near the lacrimal major, and the thread according to what is near the lacrimal mendre, and adjust the threads between the fingers with equality, and then raise all the incision over that which is marked here with a figure as we have said.
And then adjust the two sides of the patch with stitching, and cure that within until it heals.
May if an abscess is found in your incision or your crack, then that abscess with wax and like it, and moisten it.
In some cases the hair of the eyelid is converted, so that when you use it on that in which we have said about incision; but stitching is more artificial.
Taxanir with knives is according to this shape: And that you convert the eyelid and split the figure inside as I have said; and then, by art, make two knives or two thin stiles of the length that is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is less than that of the spatum. You have already cut into the edges of any crack, where you have the thread.
And then add any thread with subtlety under water that is surplus of the eyelid, and tighten the stiles of any crack with firm tightness, and leave it for a while, because the incision by tightness will die and rot and decay within until it disappears.
May if it is delayed, then break the patch with a sharp knife, and then cure the wound within until it heals.
Then when it is solid, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not poke.
And this is the shape of two stiles that you will make according to this shape: and it has neither a length nor a width more or less.
Chapter .XII.
On the raising of skin to make incisions when the skin is hard.
When the skin is unnatural and hard, and sharp, perform the operation as follows: take a fine needle and pass it in at that part where it gives way to the subtle fiber; then adjust the ends of the skin so as not to be noticeable, and tie with a simple knot. And the length of the threads should be the width of a palm.
Then take another fine thread and tie it in a knot under the skin, and cut off the ends if you wish.
Then place the patient's head between your knees, and so as not to be seen, bring the wound close to the nape, since this is a delicate operation and small.
Then insert the needle into the root of the skin that has been adjusted, with care; and make it enter quickly into the eyelid so as not to tear the natural skin.
Then draw the skin inwards and insert it into a loop; take the thread twice or thrice, and don't tie it yet.
Then take your hand away from there where the skin is being drawn out and looped; don't touch the patient' eye, so that the natural skin doesn't tear.
But if it is being pulled looped and not torn, you will pull the looped skin above where it is tied to the thread, so that it doesn' tear when you draw up the loop.
Then let the wound be seen, since you will have pulled up the skin looped and tied to the thread; then tie it tight and cut off the ends, leaving them for two or three days, so that the skin may adhere to its place and grow well over it.
And if the skin is too loose, then adjust a long piece of the natural skin, and raise it up; or you leave it there for a while, then raise it up.
Chapter  .XIII
On the care of the eyelid that lies on top of the eyelid.
When the wound is in the eyelid and it becomes tight there, or on the right or left side, for a bad consolidation of plague or a sectioning or cauterization, and this is called "leporina," and that which happens by consolidation of plague or by sections or cauterization, or due to similar appearances, are natural or accidental.
Then the way to perform the operation is that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it; and place it between those two pieces of cloth, and tie them up so as to be healed.
And don' use any cure of it from the causes that dry or tighten; for if you make water return to its natural state, there is not a fire that can burn it in time.
Use on it from causes that soften; as, for example, fenugrec, and immerse it in water that is hot or cold and tasty, or apply astringent to it, which has been liquefied among some oils, and dip it into that bath, and treat with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all that can be done by means of water without consolidation, according to the form in which it begins to burn.
This operation that we have described is nothing but a correction of the wound that does not return to its original form according to how it begins to burn in front.
Chapter  .XIV.
On the care of the wound that is in the eyelid below.
This cure, which is performed on the eyelid below, is called  "vertadieramente" cure; and it is either natural or accidental.
It may be accidental due to plague or a sectioning or cauterization, or from similar appearances.
And the way to perform the operation is that you take a needle with a double thread, and hold it in the flesh; and let the thread run from the tear of the left eyelid through the middle of the nose, so that the thread comes out on the two ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the skin at the edges with the needle and cut it with the blade; and make a wide cut with the scalpel. And if the shape of the eyelid returns according to how it was before, then it is good; but if not, take a thread and place it in the split, and turn the eyelid; and make the two splits at the bottom of the eyelid.
Then make the two ends of the splits meet at two angles of the incision, which has been made so that they intersect; and let the figure formed by them be the same as when they meet together.
This figure is a Greek letter:  (lambda).
Then stretch the flesh out by that amount which is the width of it at the bottom; then secure the eyelid.
Then adjust those parts that are separate and stitch them up with a wool thread; and treat those with water that we have said about the medicines that soften, and wash within so that it is healed.
And if the cure described above is by a split or suture or cauterization, then you should make a flat split on the skin of the eyelid according to how it was before. Then separate them with two cloth strips according to what we have said.
In the summary of the speech about the cure that is up or down, which takes place in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of a cure, and that is done in a variety of ways.
The expert should always prepare the things in any way possible so that it returns to its original form; and if not, near that form, and the patient according to the operation and the instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter   .XV.
On the cure of the wound that is in the eyelid and if it is natural or accidental.
When this consolidation happens in people who are sick and the eyelid is stuck to the white of the eye, and its movement and work are restricted; then insert a thread into the outer edge of the lid, and lift it up; or extend it upwards with an oil.
Then you cut the adhesion on a thin blade, which is not sharp in the incisions; keep your hand away from the eye so as not to disturb it during the operation, and leave the blade there so that it doesn' rub against the eye's sharpness.
Then let your incision remove that adhesion easily so that the eyelid returns according to its original form, and all of it is healed.
Then you put into the eye salt water that you wash with; or distill in the water of Zuni that is dissolved in it.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a cloth; and place it in salt water infused with oil, and let the third day be used for curative causes according to what is consolidated, and that is healed.
Chapter    .XVI.
On the cure of the wound that is in the eye and if it is natural or accidental.
You know that ice is second to two ways, for it either is nerveless and resembles hard subtile cipher, or is non-nerveless and resembles white frost which, when touched, can't be forced to stick, and the touch will cause it to go away; its onchuses don't stay.
And these spices dont start until the lacrimal membrane, which comes little by little and covers the eye, stops the light and movement of air.
The way of working the incision is that the patient stops his head in the air, and opens his eyelids, raises his eyelids with your hand, and collects the ice-onchuses in a few dupliquations and extends them to the edges. And take an needle and insert it into the end of a horse or cow or sheep or goat hair, or something similar, or hard fat; double the tip of the needle little by little and leave it in the middle of the ice, and pass it through with the fat; stretch it to the edges, and cut off the hair at the tip of the ice; take that piece of hair and thread it onto the needle; and extend it to the edges, and pull out with the hair. And so you will continue with that thread inside up to the back of it.
Then you will cut the nose in the base of the lacrimal bone with a sharp knife or tiny scissors and leave the flesh of the lacrimal bone exposed so that by incision it doesnt produce continuous tears.
And sometimes the ice is spread with a thin layer of oil or fat, then it is cut as if it were a piece of leather, and so that the shape of it is preserved:
And remember that with the knife you dont touch the clear skin, and that the rupture isnt deep, and that the pupil is punctured.
Then incision gets into the foot a little bit of salt mixed with fine sand or something similar to cut off some hair, and leave it inside until another day; and then cure that with water so that it is healed.
If the ice is not nervous and you can't put in the needle, or it doesnt stay on top of the ice, then this special kind of ice is cured with medicines, and so it is healed with eye drops and recommended in the division.
If you want to cut that ice, then open the patient's mouth and take a sharp knife according to this form: with subtility. And if the ice is rarefied and is hard to cut with a sharp knife or salt mixed with something similar, then distil it from your mouth in the hole of some hair, and leave the hole inside for another day.
Then repeat the operation on that ice until it is completely broken down, except for water, because then you leave it and cure the swelling at the beginning so that it is healed.
Then repeat your operation on that ice with reason so that it is healed.
The removal of the lacrimal flesh, if it is a great problem in the foot, should be suspended with oil; cut that ice from one side, and dont finish the incision so that the tears dont flow continuously.
Then distill in the lacrimal hole something similar to cut off some hair until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of incision of a foetus in the womb and of water born of animal blood in the foot.
Some blood mixed with urine is born in the eyelids of a cow and is placed inside so that it covers the pupil, or moves closer or further from the eyes, and presses the eyelids together like pillars, and is joined to a column.
The operation is that the patient stops his head in the air, and opens his eyelids and collects all of that blood with a needle or basket convenient to water, and then water at the beginning so that it is finished with the incision, and remember the foot that doesnt cut off your work.
And be your incision the same way that you cut those or with a sharp knife which we have recommended in cutting the ice, or with tiny scissors according to which form it takes; and remember this chapter for guidance when cutting the ice.
Then, when your incision is complete and all of that blood has been removed, fill the foot with salt mixed with something similar to the medicine that corrossives, and place it over the foot in case of a swelling caused by cutting off some hair within the womb so that it doesnt occur.
If there is any cause of algardenices and it is hard to cut off some hair within the womb, so that you dont cause a swelling, then leave the foot and cure that swelling with water so that it heals, and repeat your operation on that ice with reason so that it is healed, and make a scar in the animal flesh which occurs in the foot of this species.
However, remember that you dont remove any cure of the foot by natural or accidental means through fire, and dont put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from those operations.
Chapter XVII.
Of blood collection in the foot.
These veins are hard and cover the foot so that you cant see your work, and the foot is kept longer for days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the foot on which the blood is strong and not another disease than blood, then collect that blood.
And it is that you order the patient to stop his head in the air, and suspend those veins with an oil or two according to your prudence; and make those oils double according to this form:
or two oils gradually in one part according to this form:
Then those veins are collected with scissors and dried with subtility, and abstain from working them for a while, so that the veins are not re-formed on the foot and are shredded.
And remember that you dont cut the foot with the edge of a knife; and if your work is in the morning before the sun rises, and hold fast to your work so that you dont cut off any blood vessels.
Then when you have finished, then distill in the foot strong water or salt to corrode that blood which is re-formed from blood.
If water is not possible to collect at that time, then collect all of it with a needle and leave it for some days so that the pain of the foot is numbed, and ensure that swelling caused by cutting off hair is prevented.
Then repeat the same way again if necessary so that it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
Of reducing aridity to the nose.
When you treat aridity with cauterization or acute medicine according to the narrative that precedes it and it is not healed, then dont make it in it but prepare for a swelling due to the cutting off of hair necessary for maturity of it, and extract all moisture from it which is inside it and the air within it so that it can be discovered the bone.
And then when the bone is discovered and rusted or blackened, then you cut it with this instrument whose form is as follows:
It is called a sharp cap, and made of hard iron, and so made that it is sharpened with a point of lime or rounded with a point of subtility (and so made in the following form).
And place it over the spot where the bone is infected, and turn it between your fingers, and gently press your little finger into it little by little so that you can feel the infection has been removed.
Then have a few holes drilled, and restore the area with caustic and drying agents.
So if the area is well healed and good flesh covers it and the scar is separate from the sound part of the body for ten days, and does not become inflamed or suppurate again, then you will know that it has been cured.
And if not, then instead of making an incision along the nose, do so in the shape of a V; and thus: for you to cut along the nose, then you make an incision following this shape:
The tip of the iron is triangular, and the handle slightly curved at the end; thus, when you cut, the curve follows this shape:
Then place it over the bone, and keep your hand near the lacrimal; and move your hand slightly forward from the handle, and gently turn your hand towards you so that the point penetrates all of the bone, and the patient feels a pulling sensation as it goes in; and thus, with this movement:
Then restore the area with caustic medicines that dry it out as well; thus, if it is healing:
If the flesh does not heal over the area then the matter that has been discharged from the wound returns to the nose; therefore, place a little salt on the patient's nose.
Chapter 10.
On the Reduction of a Tumor on the Nose.
When the tumor is complete and nothing hinders or decreases it, then know that you should loosen the nose bandage, and continue with the following: and then blow into the nose regularly with steam, and then place a liniment on the nose made of oil of rose, aloe, sage, and zinc oxide; and then tighten the plaster over the nose with powder.
And the method of making the powder is that you take sheets of sheepskin, and each sheet is doubled over four times; and make these sheets into powder.
Then place those sheets on top of each other according to the quantity that the nose requires. Then tighten those sheets on top of each other with a strong, tight bandage; and then continue with the steam treatments as mentioned above; and then remove the bandage at night, and let the nose rest in a warm position.
Perhaps if, meanwhile, the ligature becomes soft, then know that it should be tight.
Then remove the bandage at night as well; thus, you have everything said.
And if the nose has already been reduced in size, then it is good; and if not, then repeat the plastering with powder and tightness and steam treatments until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
On the Incision of a Tumor on the Eyebrow.
When the tumor disrupts the eyelid, and it is large and prominent, then cut out the eyelid with a sharp knife as if cutting a hair; and thus prepare the form of a man with that; and then insert the blade into the root of the eyelid on the side nearest the lacrimal bone, and let it penetrate; and then cut along the blade, and take the first blade according to its position; and then continue cutting along the double edge of the blade, and tighten it at the end; thus, you have described the form of a man:
Then remove the blade and place it over the nose with wool infused with milk of Magnesia; and let it remain until it hardens.
Then treat the nose with water that comforts it, so that the plague is healed.
In certain cases, a large bandage is placed over the entire nose, and is adjusted to fit the eminence; and it is pierced with a fine needle that enters through the edge of the nose, and runs the liquid albumin, and dips the nose and enters as well:
Then tighten it so that it is healed.
Chapter 12.
On the Treatment of Eye Diseases.
This malady, which is called alconati, is nothing but a disease that is made in the nose resembling running water, and it is not that one.
Perhaps the method of working on it is that you make the nose burn with a hot iron, and place your two fingers on its sides; and then see if the disease comes to the parts near the eyes, and if it does not run down, and if it remains dry, and if the light does not hurt, and if the patient can see; and thus:
If it does not run down, you will know that it is water.
If it is not prepared for the descent of the disease with water as mentioned above, then place a sharp needle over the eyes and pierce through the eyelids, cutting towards the corner of the eye (where it meets the conjunctiva) on the eyeball's corona; thus, the disease will be forced out.
Then, once it is forced out, you will know that the water is being distilled in the nose; and prepare a solution of water, to which you have added honey or water in which you have already brewed fenugrec and honey.
Then treat the other causes as well, so that it is healed.
Chapter 12.
On the Treatment of Water Descending from the Nose.
I have already mentioned the spices of water in the division and how to pierce them with a sharp instrument; then proceed as follows:
Then know that you should make the patient burn with a hot iron between his two fingers over a plate; and thus place your finger on its sides, and then see if the water descends; and if it does not, then treat it as mentioned above.
Then place your hand on the eyelid of the affected side of the nose; if the water descends into the left side of the nose, then it is the left eye; or if it descends into the right side, then it is the right eye.
Then place your right hand on the forehead, if the nose is left-sided; or with your left hand, if the nose is right-sided.
Then place the end of your hand on the forehead, just above the eyebrow; and let it remain there until it hardens. Then remove it with a sharp knife and treat the patient as mentioned above.
Then pierce into the nose's albumen, and feel that the albumen is already reaching the eye cause;
Then know that the measure of the path of the albumen to the eye is equal to the measurement of the pupil within the edge of the dark ring, and it is the nose' crown; because you will see through the nose' pupil with clarity thanks to the conjunctiva layer.
Then place the albumen within the space in which the water is; and then throw it down with another sharp instrument, and if the water descends quickly, then know that the patient's sight has been restored; and if the albumen falls into the eye, then treat it as mentioned above.
Then wait a little; and if the water descends, then remove that other sharp instrument before the albumen falls into the eye.
Then, when it stops descending and has hardened, remove it easily with a sharp instrument; and then wash the nose inside with clear salt water extracted from gems, and with milk of magnesia mixed with rosewater and albumin of sheepskin; and finally, tie the nose with wool infused with rozmarin oil and milk of magnesia.
These are the days that we who live now must bear upon this world, over which there comes a cloud of death.
And if you do not obey your body when it craves food for its hardness - for there are some men for whom hunger is harsh - then know that you should take the spoon which is called an albutro, and this is the way to use it:
And therefore pierce that joint with your knife, and do not place your hand on the spot, and do not delay in applying the poultice to the soft skin.
Then introduce the food as I have described.
And you must compliment your own work, preparing the patient's sleeping place nicely in a dark room, and prohibiting all movement.
And place water on his head so that its nature is cool, and do not touch his hair to the right or left.
Then prepare the body according to its disposition within the third day.
Then remove it from that dark room and examine the body closely, and return it to its place within the seventh day.
And do not place water on him in the hour of the cure or at any other time; rather, apply the infusion. When you have removed water because it pollutes the body greatly and vigorously with regard to its sight.
May it happen that a fever arises suddenly; then, if you remove the body before the seventh day, and apply water to calm the fever.
Then you shall wash his face and place it in a dark room for several days; it is in the dark room that it will be cured of its fever.
And then remove it from that room gently and talk to it about its causes.
And you should know that in an abortion the disciplinarian cannot excuse himself from seeing certain visions, and then you must be diligent about the operation.
And we have already encountered some of those who are subject to the Art, and some said that they cause fire in the Air; and one says that he pierces the air with his knife, and water flows out of it.
But there is nothing strange in our country that has achieved water by piercing; and no water is produced from some of the ancient elements; perhaps it is new.
These are the ways of magical herbs so that they affect those who do not know them:
They are made of iron or steel in its own right, and the two ends of this triangle are sharp, one end being subtle.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure for nose bleeding.
When various meats are pushed together in the nose, and some cause of it is gathered because of the weight of the blood; this disease is called polyps, since it resembles a mass of meat in shape. And of him is carnivorous meat, with the appearance of a lion, not with the color of the fox.
Then place the foot of the patient between your thighs and put it on the sill, and open the nostrils with a pointed instrument; then cut the tip of the nose in those meats. Then take the meat off the bone, and cut it with a sharp knife that has been greased; then, if any of it is left, take it with a pointed instrument easily, so that none remains except what you want to remove, for there is no reason to remove more. May it happen that a fever arises suddenly and is cool, then remove the water; or if it is a malignant fever, then cut and cauterize it completely, leaving no holes.
Then remove any agate from the nose, sharp as a blade and as cold as water or as wet as you can. May it happen that the nose bleeds, and if it is a wet heat within the palate, then know that it is healed.
May it happen that if it does not penetrate further, then know that there is nothing inside except bones and cartilage; and no bleeding has occurred.
Then place the knife firmly on the food, and cut it into pieces of the same size; then, between each piece, measure the quantity with your fingers, and hold the foot of the patient between your thighs, and insert an end of the knife into the nose from below or from above for any reason that may be possible.
And then water will flow, and its odorant will enter the passages of the nose, and be exuded on its skin, since children are attracted to such things in school, and it is a cause that one wants to do this.
Then place both ends of the knife, one coming out of the nose and the other inside it; then cut the meat into pieces with your fingers, and water will flow within that you know has reached the end of the meat; for if not, then place the knife back in the nose from below or above.
Then remove the knife, and take care in the nose to cut off the tip of a bone, and water will flow for three or more days within that which is irritated by the flesh; and let it be covered with ointment.
Then at the end of this cause, place in the nose a pipe made of lead to drain it over time until it is healed.
May it happen that if you want to use this cure, then do so.
And this is the form of the instrument with which water and medicine are distilled in the nose:
Water made from silver or iron, which looks like a small flame lit up, as well as a small spoon and the meat resembling.
And if you wish, make a closed pipe with a tube and the tube of the instrument that purifies being flat, visible; to which you can attach it when you drain the water or medicine from the patient's nose, and hold it in your hand while doing so.
Chapter 25.
Of the treatment for nosebleeds in the extremities of the nose.
The vision of a nosebleed in the extremities of the nose is magnificent and striking within a few days when it seems to be getting worse because of its appearance.
And then remove that foot at the beginning of its appearance; and if you want to avoid bleeding, then place a piece of meat on it. Then place over the spot, or cauterize or apply medicine that burns in its place.
May it happen that if the cutting of the nose is delayed until it is magnificent, then know if it is Lapidary, with its color being dark and its texture being soft, and do not touch that foot with metal, since it is a cruel fever; for the vision of this fever is great over the person who has it.
And if the fever is sharp and not of dark color, and sometimes it can be cut in all parts; then remove the foot and cut the nose with a sharp knife, and cure the spot with water that heals and distills within it so that it may be healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of the surgery of the nose and lips, and of the ear when continuity is interrupted by plague or similar causes.
Do you know that when surgery to restore continuity in one of these cartilages is performed, it succeeds in only a few men?
So, when any such cause as mentioned above occurs to him, you should consider if it is fresh plague; then adjust the two lips of the patient with sutures and carefully heal the wound.
And if the lips that were severed by the wound are now healed, and each one is healthy again, then you should cut off the hair on the area with a scissors, making sure not to injure the skin. Then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle the wound with dragon's blood and turpentine, and place a plaster of silver or any other hardening plaster on it, leaving it for two days or three, and then remove it and replace it with another plaster, allowing the flesh to come away by itself from the skin, and carefully heal the wound.
The method of suturing is that you add the solution to restore continuity, or with needles as mentioned above in the suture of the belly, or you add the solution to the wound, and make sure to let it dry completely.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the removal of those causes that cause problems in the two lips when they are split.
This is sometimes seen in men as a result of the split in their lips: small hard lumps resembling grain; and some are small and some are large.
And when you have removed the hard lumps from both lips, and cleared each one of them thoroughly: sprinkle the wound with turpentine until the plague is cleansed, and wash it with water that has been made stiff; then carefully heal the wound.
Chapter  .xxviii.
Of the incision of meat that is sutured to the gums.
This is a great deal of information about the removal of meat from the gums: when the young ones are taken care of by white milk, then you should suspend that meat on a string or thread and cut it off at the right time; then allow the blood to run out or the plague to be removed.
Then apply a little turpentine or another drying powder to the wound.
And if that meat returns, then cut it again, but do not cauterize it, as cauterization will not help.
Chapter .xxix.
Of teeth that cause pain.
When, on the surface of teeth that are split within, and between the gums, are some rough spots, and some small lumps are black and become yellow or green through the gum, and some teeth are loose:
And when you have made the incision between your teeth and placed a finger on top of them to prevent them from moving, and rubbed the teeth where those spots are: if they do not cause any discomfort, then remove the blackness and yellow and other spots with a file; otherwise, leave them alone.
Then if the cause of the pain is in those teeth at the beginning of the root: do not repeat the treatment; but if it is in a later place, then repeat the treatment three times: first on one side, second on the other, and third time on both sides, until you arrive at the last segment.
Do you know that teeth require different shapes and forms of the roots depending on the operation to be performed? And because the roots of the teeth that split within have different shapes depending on whether they are cut between the teeth or in other ways: these forms of rasors must be properly prepared, which you will see soon enough.
Chapter   .xxx.
Of tooth extraction.
Then when you have healed the tooth from its pain: extract it slowly and thoroughly, as there is no reason to delay the extraction of the tooth when it causes pain; for it is a substance that is eliminated in the extraction process.
Then when the incision is forced for the extraction of a tooth: you must carefully determine which tooth is painful; otherwise, you may extract a sound tooth and cause pain in it, and we have seen this happen in many operations on the teeth.
Then you must carefully determine which tooth is painful; and when you know it well: cut off the gum from around the tooth at its root with a scissor, so that it dissolves from the gum completely; then remove it with pliers or small scissors little by little until it comes out whole.
Then hold it firmly with two strong tweezers or a clamp; place the tip of the tooth between your thumbs, holding it firmly so as not to break it; and remove it with pliers or small scissors in such a way that you do not break it into pieces, nor hurt the patient's mouth.
And if it is not a root canal: then take one of those instruments, and remove it with ease as if it were cut at the beginning.
Then if the tooth is loose or corroded: make sure to use a scissor and a sharp string; cut off the root with the latter, so that it does not break in your hand when you remove it.
And when you cut the gum completely around the tooth: hold it firmly so that it does not break and cause pain; then return to the patient' mouth; if you need to remove a tooth that hurts more than another, do so first.
And remember that you will not cause any harm by removing their teeth: for the great men who have difficult teeth to extract, and whose roots are long, or some of them, or by extracting one of them with a number of bones: this has been witnessed by many.
Then the extraction of it be washed thoroughly with water that is made stiff; or with a mixture of salt and water.
And if there is bleeding during extraction as often happens: then cut off a little blood and sprinkle it on the patient; or if you do not have it, cauterize it.
The shape of the tweezers and forceps must be small at the end from which the tooth is removed: it should have a fine grip on the tooth; it should not be twisted when used; they should be sharp, but not blunt.
And the handle should be large enough to hold comfortably: it should not twist when used; it should be sharp but not blunt.
And they are made of iron of Indian descent: the handles should be straight ends; those that curve inwards should be placed next to those that curve outwards; and those that curve inwardly should be shaped like the beak of a bird; and some of these curved ones are very small, so that they can be held comfortably.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the extraction of teeth and breaking of bones of the mandible that are broken.
And when you should extract a tooth that is broken and causes pain: pause over the area with a probe for a day or two until the area becomes soft; then insert pliers or small scissors into the opening of the tooth: use tweezers or forceps with curved ends, shaped like the beak of a bird:
The extremities of them are made to go inside like with almond or olive oil.
And if you do not obey to him and pull with these forceps or hold them, then note that you make the cut on the root and open all the flesh and introduce this instrument which has no name, so is a small lever whose shape is this:
And it should be of thick end a little one, and not be embedded so that it does not break.
Therefore if by water the root is dried up, it is good; and if not, help you with these other instruments whose shapes are these: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at its end where there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a slightly pointed end.
And you are helped with this instrument having two ramps whose shape this follows: and with other instruments that will be necessary to remove teeth; because quickly it is made with this instrument which is assembled like a nut, and this is the shape:
of the triangular end bent or short, which has some thickness, and not be embedded so that it does not break.
And you should know that the dental instruments are similar to the others.
May the artisans be wise and careful in their work, for according to this, it is necessary to make different operations and treatments; because there are many diseases that the old did not know or stop properly by using instruments of various shapes.
And if the bones of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are broken, it is necessary to take care about that in its place with water that is convenient for them of the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of teeth, and help you with gestures of which this is the form:
And it should be of some thickness to small one, and be stretched or tied to the mouth so that it does not escape or run away until the bone is completely dried up; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines according to water.
And if in the bone there is a small hole, then cut that from that hole and from its blackness, and take care about it so that it heals.
Chapter 32
Of the cure of prominent teeth compared to others.
When prominent teeth are not in line with the natural course of their companions, their shape is wedge-shaped, and more so when they affect the elders or venerable women; therefore you should consider: if a tooth is not next to another tooth, and cannot be split or oiled, then break it; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument whose shape is this: it is similar to a pork tusk, and is made of Indian iron of triangular pointed end.
And be your incision with which you cut that in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not connected to another of the teeth.
And if prominent teeth are cut by grinding, then grind that with iron of Indian origin whose shape is this:
And all of it is made of Indian iron and the edge is slightly pointed; and are made with almond-shaped points using a sharp knife, grinding the tooth little by little in two days with ease, so that another tooth does not connect to it and become stuck. And then close that at the end, and cut that with razor blades.
And if a tooth is broken on one side and the tongue touches it, then note that you grind that part which is sharp and worn out, and make it flat so that the tongue does not scratch or the word does not corrupt.
Chapter 33
Of the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver wire.
When a tooth is hit or damaged by impact or falling, and the patient cannot bear more than that which is attached to gold wire, and you have not healed with your medicine, then change it so that it does not get infected; and use gold wire instead of silver, because silver becomes green and must be sharpened again after a few days, but gold never changes.
And be the wire in such thinness and thickness according to the amount that can enter between teeth; and the shape of the incision is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and grow it twice around the wire between two gold fillings, or if one or two, then let the thread reach the healthy tooth on the other side. And repeat the incision as many times as necessary to reach the end of the tooth from which you started, and strengthen your grip with ease and care until it is not tight.
And be your tightening with which you tighten the wire to the roots of teeth that do not escape.
And then cut the excess of the wire with forceps or tweezers, adding them in such places, and making them disappear between the healthy tooth and the gold filling, so that they do not hurt the tongue. And then leave that stretched as it is with thread.
And if it is slipped or broken, then tighten it or them with another wire in such a way throughout all the time.
This is the shape of teeth and the figure of an incision of two healthy teeth and two gold fillings, thus tied:
When one or two teeth move back to their places, and are sharpened as described above, and remain so.
And do not make this except for skilled and experienced doctors.
And some are suitable for the root of a cow's tooth, and is made from them in the shape of a tooth, and is placed in its place where it fails, and is tightened as described above, and remains so for a long time.
Chapter 34
Of the incision of the tongue that is seen in the tongue and prohibits speaking.
This tongue is seen sometimes leaving the tongue for some time or is natural to him who has it, or happens accidentally because of a wound that has already healed.
And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the patient, his head is raised up; and then cut that nerve with a sharp knife according to its width so that the tongue does not stick to it.
And if in that there is hardness or pain, and water stands because of the consolidation of the wound, then cut that with oil and make it smaller according to its width so that the nerve does not remain cut and remains soluble.
And take care that there is no made crack in the meat of the tongue, and here cut here is hard and bring water to flow from the blood.
And then wash the trace of the incision with water or soap or clean water; and then leave the tongue alone for a moment so that it does not consolidate again; and so finish this task, leaving the patient's tongue alone.
And if there is a flow of blood, then put it on the spot with a bitter taste; and if the blood flows out, then cauterize that place with a common cauterizer that brings water to boil. And then heal that one with other diseases as they heal.
Chapter 35
Of the extraction of a tonsil without hurting the tongue.
Sometimes there is an ap on the tongue that looks like a small piece of meat, and it prohibits speaking; and when it becomes loose, it is great danger to the mouth; for it opens the way for food.
And the operation on him is that you make an incision in the mouth of the patient in front of the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see that it is a red or black color, hard, where the patient does not feel sensation, do not touch that part as it is tender.
And if it is white in color, where there is moisture, then put the vinegar on him, and scrape that with a sharp knife, and scrape all of it; and if blood comes out in the hour of your operation, then pause for three days, because it is acidic, until it stops bleeding.
Then continue with your work until you have taken care of him completely, washing him with vinegar and salt; and heal that with the other treatment using water until it is healed.
Chapter .XXXVI.
On the Extraction of Abscess from Two Ears and on That Which Is Not in the Jaw and Other Abscesses.
When it happens in the jaw, there are glands that are gathered together, which happen unexpectedly and are called two ears, which, when you treat them with water that I have mentioned in the division, and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of red color, of little sensation, do not touch that part with iron.
And if it is a red color and the root is thick, do not touch that part with iron because of the flow of blood; let it mature, and then either you pull it out or she cuts it off herself.
And if it is a white color, soft, and the root is small, then that one should be incised to see if it can be cured.
And the operation on him is that you consider, before your operation, if he has already healed his abscess completely or if it has decreased in any way; and then place him in front of the sun, with his head between his legs, and make an incision in the mouth, and the servants hold his hands behind, holding a noble instrument by which this is the form:
It should be made of silver or bronze, and it should be sharp with a point.
Then when you press on him with your finger and show the abscess to yourself, and place the onion on it, then tie it with a knot, and pull it apart as far as you can. Or if any fluid comes out when you press, then consider that one with the following form:
Or if any fluid comes out when you press, then consider that one with the following form: it is assembled with forceps, however, the extremities of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is at the end of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron in a particular way.
If this instrument is not with you, then scrape it with a blade, which should be sharp on one side but not sharp on the other.
And after you have made one incision, make the other according to this method of incision, and then the incision will be cured by washing with water.
If there is blood flowing from the incision, wash with water made from oak gorse or orange peel and similar to those of the causes of bloodletting until the flow of blood stops, and then heal it as if it were healed.
Some are located in the jaw and other abscesses are those two ears, and scrape them according to what I said in the incision of two cuts alike.
I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her jaw, which abscess was of red color and had little sensation, which had already closed her jaw, and the woman breathed normally, but she had forbidden her to eat or drink water, and she was close to death if she did not stay like that for another day or two.
And the abscess was already very large, having three fingers in length, and it was coming out through two passages.
Then I hid myself from him carefully and took one of his onions, and threw it at him, and a large piece came out, and then I incised that one where I could understand the other, and then I closed his mouth, and pressed his tongue, and then I tied the onion to that abscess.
And then I cut him open wide, and there was no pain from it except a little blood. Then I completely opened the jaw of that woman, and he began to drink water again, and then I stopped scraping that abscess for a while, and that abscess became in place of that one, which I had incised, until it healed over it.
Then I went and cauterized his jaw, and then I walked around and did not know that God was with me.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the Incision of a Breast When It Is Swollen.
When it drains on the breast, and it is swollen and long, then it is called an upright bubble; and if it is thick and round at the base, then it is called a sitting bubble.
If it is cured with water that I have mentioned in the division, and your treatment does not work on it, and if it is swollen again and is soft, then consider that you scrape that one that is round; and if it is long and bleeds a little, of red or black color, and it does not hurt much, then consider that you scrape that one.
And when you see that one according to the way I have described to you of its whiteness and length, then consider that it is a new one, and press his tongue against the instrument with which this form is made, and then tie the onion to it, and pull it apart as far as you can.
And consider that you do not scrape that one unless it comes out naturally on its own, because if you scrape it more, it will make him talk more.
And then the incision, use water with which I have described in the incision of two cuts, and heal it as if it were healed.
If the patient was frightened by the incision on him, consider that you use water in cauterizing him with his own fear, and the way of cauterization on him is not but to pour sharp water, and it is because you pause the end of the patient's tongue against the instrument which I have mentioned, and then dip that into the water which I have described in the chapter of cauterization, and then heat that with fire, and do not let it get too hot or too cold, and then fill the concave part of the instrument with it:
be it the extension of his tongue, which is concave, and pause the instrument with medicine on his throat, and the patient chews because of the medicine inside, so that it does not come out in a certain way, and so that he swallows it; and this will prevent him from speaking or making a noise in his throat, so that those who are near do not hear what he is saying.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and press it over his throat for a long time, up to an hour, so that he does not get black or sleepy because of the medicine biting him.
And if you want, take hold of it and wrap it over the end of the tongue, and dip that into the medicine, and put the tongue into a tube; so that the end of the tongue sticks to that tube, and then pour the water used in cauterization onto that tube, and let it dry out for three or four days.
And if you feel that the medicine needs to be repeated, repeat it again, and Abstain from cauterizing in the circuit of the grape with the burning edge in border, and wash it with the water of friction, and cure it in front of the embrocation, and within that which is to be healed.
This type of treatment is more safe than cutting and less scary.
Some eye problems are treated with water that is milder than cauterization and cutting, because it is cured with sub-smoking in this way: Take chamomile, hyssop, marjoram, rugosa, sweet marjoram Arabic, camomile, bread, and similar herbs to those, and combine all of them or some of them in a bowl, and dip them in vinegar, and boil; then the bowl should be well stirred, and placed in its place on the table, with a hole above it, on which a sharp tool made of metal is set according to this method; make it from silver or from iron.
And the end should be inserted into the patient's mouth where the vapor can reach the uvula from above, so that the uvula becomes cloudy.
And repeat on those spots again until they are dry, and be careful not to apply this treatment at the beginning of an outbreak of blisters, because it would be too strong for them, and don't make water, but rather declare a blister from his cautery.
Or if you don' have this instrument, then take a cane and put it on the end of it a closed pipe, so that the patient'a mouth is sealed, because the pipe of the water prevents the smoke from burning the mouth.
This treatment is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of extracting thorns and water that adheres to the foot, and of other causes.
Spots on the foot or spines of paynes or any other cause.
Then take water that is apparent from it, and let the sight rest on it, because your tongue presses against the instrument in front of the sun, so that the water that is in the mouth is declared.
And water that does not appear to your eye in the foot, take it to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because it removes the attached cause of the blisters by vomiting; or have the patient drink a fishbone, or a raisin of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; or hold a sponge of dry sea-leek tightly to his tongue, and then make the patient swallow it whole, for if you remove it to the place where thorns are attached and extract them, then they will be removed without pain. Or take a snake and hold it by the tail, and put it on a table and cut off its head; or take a pig and cut off its tail, and put it under the water.
Or if you don' remove those causes that we have mentioned, then use an iron instrument according to this form:
And it should be thinner than a thin thread, and in the end of it there should be a cavity that you insert into his mouth easily.
And keep his head raised up high, and be careful that the touch of his jaw to the neck does not cause him pain, so that it reaches his teeth or bone, or that he swallows it with the food.
But the patient who inserts it is worse, because his knowledge of the place of the attached cause and pulling his mouth toward the instrument, all according to the quantity that is prepared for him before it causes pain.
Chapter .xxix.
Of extracting blood blisters attached to the foot.
When the blood is treated with water that we have mentioned in the division of medicine treatment and you don' agree, then consider on the foot of the patient under the sun, because your tongue has been pressed against the instrument that we have described to you.
Then if you want to remove the blood blister, extract it with a small knife or a delicate tool carefully.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it in that way, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the foot of the patient, and place a hot iron in the cavity of the tube, and pour water as many times as the blood blister is dead and stops on the foot) throughout the day and let the patient drink water.
And then take a bucket full of warm water, and work the mouth with it, and wash the mouth with it; and don't drink any food or water for an hour after that, because the blood blister will soon fall off if you feel the water.
Or if it is not removed by water that we have mentioned, then sub-fume the patient with camphor or menthol using the instrument that we have described in the sub-fumigation of the uvula.
Make water, and add a little wine to it.
It is another way of operating by sub-fume, that you take a bowl filled with water and carbonized wood, and the bowl is covered with a blanket, and a hole is made in it, and the end of the instrument is inserted into that hole; then perform the sub-fumigation; and make the patient open his mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the sub-fumigation does not cause pain to him until you know that the sub-fumigation has reached the blood blister, because the blood blister will soon fall off when it feels the sub-fumigation.
And if not, then repeat the sub-fumigation many times, and prevent the patient from drinking, and eat salt foods and dry fruits, and don' drink water, and do what is necessary for him to be removed.
This is the form of the instrument with which blood blisters are removed from the foot when seen; and it is similar to tweezers except that it has no curve. which is placed on the foot, and the end of it is similar to a pigeon's beak, which is sharp, but does not cut because when it presses any cause, it doesn't let go.
Chapter.xl.
In which is the sum of surgery in the treatment of blisters and their incision.
Blisters are special spots, of different shapes, according to what they remind us of, each one in this book.
And they are diverse in piercing and cutting them in two ways, the first of which is for the species of blisters in themselves; and by the second, because of the moisture that they have.
And the second way is that they are placed in locations where the body is affected, because the blisters that form on the head are different from those that form on the foot; and the blisters that form on the flesh are different from those that form in a joint; and each of them is a game for surgery.
Some blisters are some that, if not pierced, but rather mature by the healing of the skin.
Some blisters are those that, if not pierced, but rather mature by the healing of the skin. They also have blisters that are broken when they cross over each other, and do not mature according to their completion, such as blisters that form near joints, because the blister that forms near a joint, the person's limb is prolonged until it can reach water that is in the circuit of the body, and badly corromps the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it causes pain to that member; or is a blister near a main member, and if you delay piercing it until it has not healed into another main member; or is near the rear, so pierce it not healed; and do not pierce the skin that does not heal properly, but rather pierce it in a way that reaches the split at the back, and causes a fistula, or makes a hole in the term of it that does not heal. If you know the time of the operation for the abscess, then it is when it has matured.
And know that it is mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and a decrease in pulse, and the hard center of the abscess, and the other signs.
And know that the time for operation is when there is pus coming out in the place where the abscess was and pus coming out from the cure of the eminence.
And know that the operation should be done when there is pain in the long bone of the body or in the trunk, if the abscesses are located in the joints of limbs or feet, and in places where the ligaments, nerves, or tendons are affected; and finally, in all locations that do not reflect, for in those that do, use the method of perforation according to that member.
But if the abscess is located in a bony place, then it is better to wait until its digestion has been completed, as I have already said; because if you perforate it before that time, you prolong the course of the poison in it and make the labia hard and deeper.
But some abscesses should be perforated according to the thickness of the bone or body part that needs to be operated on, or according to which member it affects.
And when you administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses make wide or multiple cuts according to the variety of their size.
And of the abscesses in which it is necessary that the cord be cut and sutured, do so when it has healed a little, so that there will not be any problems with it; because if you make cuts in them without doing this, trouble may result.
And of those that are not sutured, if they have three angles; and of those that are sutured, when it is done with the figure of a leaf, and when there are abscesses on the ankles.
And of these that are operated on with round or lunar incisions, and similar ones.
But those who have no head and whose abscesses are superficial, know that you should not make a deep incision; but if you must do so, then make it shallow.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected some pus, know that you should perforate it and not cauterize it; take out a little at a time, and on another day take out a little more, and finally take out a lot, and according to the amount of pus that comes out, make the incisions deeper or wider.
And mainly if the patient is a man of strong vitality, or a woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude; because the animal spirit has resolved to bring out the pus, and the body is weakened by it; so operate on them.
Keep this chapter in great caution; and when you administer the medicine to these abscesses, know that you abstain from using leeches or any other antiperspirant; but if the abscess is large and the cuts made are long, then know that you should put a stop to them.
And if in the abscess there is a piece of the cord that has been torn or cut, and it is sunk into the flesh, then know that you should stitch it up with old leather or linen thread; and when you have removed the scabs or the skin, wet them; and strengthen it on the third day; and finally treat it so that there will not be any more pain.
But if there is a flow of blood during the operation, administer warm water and vinegar in which to soak a cloth; and place it on the area where the blood has flowed, so that it does not spread.
But if the flow of blood persists, know that you should administer the medicine and powder that I have recommended in many parts of this book concerning division.
But if it is in winter time, and the area of the abscess is near a joint, then know that you should apply dust from vinegar mixed with oil and olive oil, and put it on the areas.
But if it is in summer time, and the areas are fleshy, then know that you should apply dust from vinegar mixed with oil or water, and all this should be done on the third day; and finally treat it so that there will not be any more pain.
And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses in general; but according to the particular way that each case presents itself, I will now explain how to treat each one specifically.
Chapter LXI.
Of the Incision of Abscesses in the Cord of the Head.
In the cord of the head there are small abscesses, and of two kinds: those that contain skin and fat, and those that contain bone only.
And of these are blisters, and of those is pus resembling lime. And of those that contain fluid resembling milk, and similar to it; and of those that are hard and dry.
And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of those that do not cause pain, you should use cauterization to prevent infection.
And the operation of cutting them is that you should use the instrument in the form which I will now describe, which is called an entremes; then know that it contains.
For if the fluid contained is moisture, then cut it with a superficial incision according to this shape:
And begin the incision of the line between B and G; then when the moisture is emptied out, then scrape off that which contains the moisture, and do not leave any trace of it, for five senses return if they remain: because there are five senses in one.
And dip it in Egyptian oil if there is any present, or salt water; and fill it with water, and leave it inside for another day, because water corrodes everything that lies under the film.
And dip it again in the oil a second and third time if it needs it, and leave it for another day; because you will not know if there is any left of that film unless you have cured the disease with oil, within which the disease is enclosed.
But if the abscess contains fat, then incise it according to this shape: A shallow incision with a shape like a croquet, and cut it between two lips of the incision and scrape out all of it, using your strength in extracting the skin that contains it.
But if your cauterization causes pain, then first of all I will tell you.
And perform the incision and treatment of the abscess according to what I have told you; and if the incised part is very dry, because it is a small amount of pus and little moisture, then know that it is almost finished.
And in some cases of these abscesses that are located on the head and affect older men; because there is no moisture in them, which causes pain when you cut into one with a scalpel; but if it is struck with a hammer, it will cause pain and break out like a blister.
But in other abscesses that are located on the head and affect children; because their hair is different from that of adults, and the incision for these should be very shallow.
And pause the puncture of those at the bottom of them in order that it be relieved to the patient's body from the lower parts.
Then approach those who are called to that of cure.
Chapter.xxii.
On the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
The following are to be found: in the neck, in the throat and in the jaw; and some also occur in other parts of the body.
And those which occur in the neck, and all scrofula from that part of the body are to be removed, and with them also those which occur in the throat and jaw, and any other parts.
The substances of these scrofula are: some of them are blisters, and those which contain moisture, and the evil ones which do not yield to cure.
Therefore in that part which you have found to be of good disposition in the Treatment, of which the color of the fluid is similar to the color of the grape, and it is deep all over, not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the air passages, and it is not thick, examine that with a small scalpel from the lower part of the body to the lower parts of the body along the line of G. within the line of B., and cut off that little by little.
It is more careful not to be cut into the veins or nerves.
And be careful not to cut into the veins or nerves; for if you were to cut into a vein or artery, and stop your work, then pause in the plague of threefold vinegar or other powders which cause a flow of blood, and examine that part where it is painful, and make it soft, and begin to decay. When the blood has been cut off.
Therefore return to your work until you have finished it.
Then ask the patient if there is any pain from the other small scrofula, then cut those off and clean those.
And if it is in the root of a large scrofula, be careful not to cut that scrofula from its root. In advance, therefore, examine that with a sharp knife and leave it in place until it has fallen off of itself, unless it causes you harm.
Then fill the plague with cold water which you have already mixed with Egyptian oil, and then cure that.
And if you cut off the whole scrofula, then be careful not to cut more than necessary; for it is enough to remove what is surplus.
But if you see that there is any surplus of the scar by reason of the size of the scrofula, then be careful to cut off its root, and then remove it, and add a bit of oil.
And those scrofula which contain moisture, pierce that with a slight puncture here where the pus is seen to rise from the body surface, and pause the puncture of those at the bottom of them in order that it be relieved to the patient's body from the lower parts.
Then approach the puncture, with oil and a similar liquid, in order that it may corrode the remaining pus; Then when you see that the plague has been cleaned, then cure that with oil of generation until it is healed.
Chapter.xxxiii.
On the section of the scrofula which occurs in the throat between the lungs.
They said that this section in the scrofula is of little account, and I did not see anyone in our country who had that.
This is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But men have a tendency to be stubborn, therefore the extraction of the scrofula should be done with care, in order that it may not kill them, since all the veins and most of the body are affected.
But in those who have blisters on the lips or between them or on two ears; when the disease is not in the teeth, be careful of the section of the scrofula to avoid waste which is caused by perforation.
Therefore when we want to measure water, let us mark off the section of the scrofula with three circles of the epiloot, or four in a small section for its length; let the section be made with a chisel and not with a saw, and this place is suitable for the section, since it takes away meat and the vessels of blood are cut.
And if the measure is small, then extend the cord of the throat to an ounce, and cut the cord within the channel, but avoid the vessels of blood, unless you see a cause for doing so.
Then approach the section of the throat as we have described; and let a flame be raised over that part with oil, which is made from him, in order that it may dissolve it, and avoid the vessel of blood, unless you see a cause for doing so.
Then leave the plague open for some time.
Therefore when the hour is right for a puncture, which is convenient, add two layers of cord to the plague, and cut that off by itself, leaving it alone.
Then administer medicine which causes the flesh to heal itself.
It is said by Albucasis that the greatest exposition of this passage which we have described is that you see that some of those scrofula have already come out of the throat of the patient, and the patient's breath is cut off, and some are to be cut off from the epiglottis so that it may breathe through that part, and be saved from death.
And by water let the plague remain open until the evil of the scrofula is consumed; and that evil remains for three days; then, after three days, let the plague be thus closed, and cure those within it which may be healed.
And the water which I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant hold a knife and cut off a part of the throat of the patient, and I was called to cure him; and I discovered the cause of the plague, and cured the blood which was caused by the plague.
Then you confessed that that did not cut any veins or arteries, and let the wind escape from the plague, and I healed those within it which were healed.
And if the servant did not return to his master in three days, then give him good medicine.
And now let me tell you that there is no danger in the section of the scrofula.
Chapter.xxxiv.
On the section of the scrofula which occurs in the throat and is called a hernia.
This scrofula, which is called the hernia of the throat, is a large one according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
It occurs in two ways; either it is innate or it is accidental.
And in the innate there is no cure.
And the accidental is of two kinds; one is similar to knots in the throat, and the other is like a scrofula which is caused by the knotting of an artery, and there is danger in both. And don't let him make assumptions on the patient until he has made small cuts. And you must carefully examine this area and if you see anything that looks like a lump of fat, and it is not suspended to any vein, then cut it with your scalpel at the base where it meets the skin, and extract it from there; but if not, then examine all of his body, and treat the affected area with some curative medicine before healing.
Chapter 45
On section of the nodes.
Of the nodes, there are some specific techniques that I have already mentioned in the division of the body.
I will explain here the difference between a node and an exit with doubt.
And so you will know that an exit is hot and painful, and has a violent fever and perspiration; and putrid matter which, when it stops the fever, the pain, and the heat, is complete.
But in a node there is no heat or fever or pain; it is covered with a thin layer of leather-like skin, which is its own natural cover.
And its color in the body is second to that of blood; and its beginning is with a vein, either large or small, and it is made up of two kinds of spirits: one dry and the other moist, and their colors are according to what I have already said in the division.
So, when you approach the cure of a node, you should extract it and examine its beginning with the instrument called an intromiser, according to which I will explain in the next chapter.
And this is the way to examine abscesses and all nodes; that is, you take this instrument and insert it into the area affected by pus, and you stir with it little by little until you are sure that the instrument has already penetrated the core.
And finally return your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the intromiser and consider what is remaining in its path.
And if any of the moisture remains, whatever color it may be, then you should carefully cut it at the surface according to what I have said in other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture remaining in the intromiser's path, then you will know that it is fat.
And dry it on top of the cut surface according to this shape: as I have taught you, and suspend it with nails, and cut the core from all parts with ease, and save the skin or the sack, if you can, over that one; and extract that blood to the node.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that blood, and you will see it flowing out, and then you should extract it little by little until it stops; because if it flows continuously, it would be difficult for the patient to survive.
For if it causes any pain, a little or too much, the node returns according to its own nature.
And if you think that it causes any small part to cause pain, then completely corrode it with some sharp corrosive powder and strengthen the corrosion, and place it on the area affected by the abscess, and treat it with some other cure until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you should cut its two sides and extract it with the blood that comes out.
But if the pulse at that location is pulsating or not pulsating, then you should bandage it and apply the vinegar to that spot for three days in order to stop the pain and allow the wound to heal; and then return to cut what remains of the node.
Chapter 46
On the necessary forms of the instruments for section and piercing.
Of those three types of intromers, two are large, one is medium, and the third is small.
The shape of a large intromer: It has an elongated shape with a sharp point at one end, like a needle, and it is used to pierce through tissue.
The small intromer has a flat, triangular shape with a sharp point on one end, similar to a chisel, and it is used for cutting and peeling away layers of tissue.
If you sharpen them properly, with a sharp edge and slightly curved ends, so that the instrument easily enters the node.
And these are the forms of experience, which are simply known as alberneds, and one of those is called birid.
Of the three types, two are large, one is medium, and the third is small.
The shape of a large experiment is like a flat circle or oval, sometimes with a slight indentation at the center, and it represents a complete circle or a curve.
The medium-sized experiment has a rounded shape, often with a slightly pointed end, like a drop of water hanging from a blade, and it represents an arc or a curve.
The small experiment has a flat, triangular shape with rounded corners, similar to a leaf, and it represents a curve or an arch.
Let us remember that these are for abscesses, hernias, and fistulas, as well as boils, which are of the bones or other causes.
And they are round, large and small needles, sewn with linen thread, and made with lemon resin, or iron or silver, and the majority are made with lemon resin.
And they are made of black plums, which it is agreed that for those they open the fistulas in the concave parts where they are reflected, which are reflected in their own light.
Of the three types, two are long and thin, and the third is medium-sized, and the fourth is short, according to the amount of width of the fistula and its narrowness.
The shape of a long experiment is like a thin rod or stick, sometimes slightly curved, and it represents a length or a width.
The medium-sized experiment is made with a flat, rectangular shape, often with rounded edges, and it represents an area or a surface.
The short experiment has a triangular shape, sometimes with one side slightly curved, and it represents a depth or a height.
The shapes of nails are of two kinds, some are simple, which have only one curve, and there are three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
And they are called orp nails, and there are three types of them.
And they have two curves, and there are three types of them.
And they have three curves, and there are also three types of them.
All of these are necessary in their place.
The small simple nail has a flat, triangular shape with rounded corners, similar to a leaf, and it represents an arch or an arc.
Form a large hook that has two curves: Form a small hook that has two curves: Form a small hook that has two curves:
Form a large hook that has three curves:
Form a small hook that has three curves:
And these are the shapes of the scalpels that cut and scratch knots and warts; there are three kinds, each one larger, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of a medium scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The ends of these are sharp and the other ends are not, they are not held in such a way, but so that it is quickly made in theexcision of knots fear of incision of veins or nerves, and for this it is cured of the patient and sometimes there is a little relief by the drying up of the wart.
And these are the shapes of the poultices, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small, thus:
When made from wax and resembling rays, which is made with alcohol.
And it is on the sharp edge punctured with hidden spice and on that course inside and outside, when you want, thus:
The shapes of the spatum, which are placed between the thighs in order to perforate the warts and not feel the pain of the patient, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small. And these are the forms of those:
The shapes of the wind instruments with which the flow of blood is stopped, and there are three kinds: large, medium and small; the forms of the feet:
When made from wax or resin, round and of a certain length, and thin.
And these kinds of wind instruments should be large, medium and small, so that by their stopping the flow of blood quickly, and then when you first start practicing medicine.
However, you do not use them to stop the blood from flowing throughout the body, but only in certain places, such as the skin folds, legs, and feet; also on the skin of the chest, breasts, and belly, and the shoulders, which are covered with hair.
Some small wind instruments are made in the shape of small scours like this; with them the blood is stopped when made by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
Some wind instruments are made round according to this form:
Chapter xliv.
Of the treatment of male breasts which are assembled from female breasts.
Some wind instruments are inflated breasts of old men with fine skin, and then inflate the breasts, and assemble the breasts of female breasts, and Roman breast implants, thin.
And if you agree with me, consider cutting those which are divided by the lunar line according to this form, from the line B within the line G, and then remove all ugliness, and then employ a cure for incurable disease, and then join the two lips of the wound together, and heal that within which is to be healed.
If the breast declines and splits into two parts and is softened by its size, consider cutting it in half from top to bottom, like a figure of a moon, where each half is contained within the other one, as if the main line contains the smaller one according to this form of the line from B within the line from G. And then remove the skin which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the bleeding, and administer what is necessary for the treatment of a sore that needs suturing, and powder it so that it heals.
And if you do not agree with me about cutting that which I cut from the worry of the patient and from the flow of blood, consider cutting it as I have done, immersing it in a corrosive solution, and then join that which it has corroded, which is made of the grey, and then heal that within which needs to be healed.
Chapter xlvii.
Of the perforation of warts that come from the inside out.
Those warts that come from the inside out are of the species of sores, dry skin, which is a sort of crust.
And of those few that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are cut in half from top to bottom according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all the liquid has been evacuated, consider it a cure for scurvy, and join it again another day.
And then let the cutting be kept in place, and be cured with a suitable ointment applied to water, so that it heals.
And if the wart of the node is there, and of the sores, consider cutting it off from above, as I have said in the section on scurvy.
May consider if the wound is extended to the area that needs to be heated, then administer it according to what I have said before.
Chapter xlix.
Of the perforation of warts that occurs through an artery or vein.
When an artery is broken and the cord is compressed which is over that, consider it a wart seen from above, as I said before, that inflammation and warts are caused by an artery or vein; for when the warts occur through an artery, they are long agglutinated in the preon of the body; and that when you cut them off with small knives, you feel a strangeness.
And what happens through a vein is seen from all sides.
And cutting through this wart is wrong, and mostly in places where the skin folds, and on the shoulders, and in many parts of the body; it is big, so that its treatment with iron may be avoided, and what is at the ends, or at the top, is to be avoided.
May consider if it happens due to inflammation of the orifice of an artery, cut it in half; and then open the cord, and free the nerves, so that they are uncovered.
And then let that needle pass through there, and let it go into the other, and join the artery with a double knot in two places; which causes an injury to your heart in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
And then cut off the place between the two threads with a sharp knife, so that it stops the blood completely while being inside, and dissolve the wart.
And then administer a cure which is caused by fire, so that the threads fall down; and heal it with a suitable ointment applied to water, so that it heals.
And if the wart is caused by incision of a vein, consider it that you have on your hand what you cut off from your hand, and then let a needle pass through there; and make a double knot in the middle, so that you extract one of the two parts of the thread, and join the wart with one line according to what I have said before about the use of a double knot.
May I then fear that they will tear the thread, let him insert the needle first and all the blood should be cut with the first incision of the needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then dry the wound in its place until it is well and when you see that it is already healing, then cut off the excess of the knot, and let it remain that way.
Then place over him the pulse which you have dipped in wine and oil, and administer the cure which is made with calamus and inkwell until it is healed.
Take care of the wound that happens due to twisting of nerves.
As soon as you see that an aposteme happens in the artery and vein, and apparently an aposteme happens in the nerves when you hit them or due to excessive work, and apparently.
It is done by hand in the places of the assistants or of the tail, or in any place where the joints are massaged.
And it is a painful apoplexy, and it resembles the color of the other limbs, and it is in the major parts of him that he loses consciousness, and when it is treated with violence, he feels a kind of stupor in him.
And it is not an apoplexy that occurs in the front of the body, and therefore the knot is left, and he becomes paralyzed all over, and does not go forward or backward.
Therefore from those who are in the joints do not cover that it is enfused with iron, for it would produce a strong counter-action.
But he who is on the head or forehead let him be with a needle. But if it is a slight apoplexy, then you should put him in the foal and cut off that which is rotted.
And if it is great, then you should suspend him with a chain, and extract that which has rotted, and then stop it; and sew the wound, and heal it quickly.
Here is the next sentence. Please provide the translation for this line as well.
Of the apoplexy that occurs from the mouth and occurs in the abdomen.
Introduce a those who have swelled bellies and other parts of the body that are similar to funguses, of which the root is small and the head of those who are big; and also those whose lips are swollen, and those who are small, and those who are swollen in many places.
You have already seen one, and in his abdomen there were two things that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between them as to whiteness, their roots being small.
And the lips of those people were turned inside out and they bled constantly.
Therefore you cut off those people and sewed them up in eighteen places. and the other had one.
And the operation in cutting them up is that you consider if the patient is hot, and the color of his skin is white, wet, and the roots are small; then cut him with a sharp knife, and if he bleeds, cauterize him. Because if you stop bleeding, cauterize him.
And if the patient is a little bit scared and frightened, do not cut him with iron; but rather take recently made lead, and tighten it on that part which has rotted, in the same way as you have told us; and let it remain for two days.
Then tighten the lead thread tightly; therefore, do not stop tightening the large lead thread until it is cut and fallen by itself, and because of that work.
But if the root is thick, then in the incision of him there is no cause for fear and anxiety, and more so in that which is in the abdomen.
It is possible that you cut off most of it, and then cauterize him so that he does not return.
Then heal the wound in which the plague has occurred.
And be careful not to cut off that part of the flesh which is of a dark color, has little feeling, and looks backward, for that part is cancerous.
Then I remembered the case of a man who...
Here is the next sentence:
Of treatment for a high umbilical hernia.
The eminence of the navel is caused by various things; or due to the fissures of the navel which is on the abdomen, and the thread or intestine comes out according to where it breaks elsewhere; or due to blood flowing from a vein or artery according to whether it flows forward or backward, or due to air being trapped in it.
But if it is due to the fissures of the navel and the thread comes out little by little, then the color of the apoplexy resembles the color of the body, and it is a painful pain, and you can see a variety of things. But if it is due to the escape of the intestine, then observe that part of the body which has just been mentioned, and if you press it with your fingers, it will return; and it becomes very heavy at the entrance, and it is a strong cause of great pain and work.
But if it is due to moisture, then it is painful and does not stay in place when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted or fixed.
And if it is due to blood, then the following signs appear: the apoplexy turns black and declines gradually.
But if it is due to flesh, then the apoplexy is hard, large, and durable; and it remains according to a certain amount.
But if it is due to air being trapped, then the touch of him is painful.
And the operation in it is that you consider if the eminence of the navel is due to blood flowing from an artery or vein, or air being trapped; then be careful not to treat it, for in that place there is fear and anxiety as I have taught you in the chapter on apoplexies treated with an artery or vein.
And if the eminence of the navel is due to an intestine or thread, then order the servant to keep his back straight, and he should stand with his feet apart; then cut off all the apoplexies up to its edge with a sharp knife in the same way as you have instructed him; and extend the large apoplexy of the navel towards the two shoulders with a strong grip; and tie it firmly around the navel, and put it around with a rope firmly.
Then cut off the middle of the apoplexy by extending it over the navel and inserting your hand into that part and pulling the intestine; and if you have caught it with your hand, then stretch it outward and pull it away from the navel.
And if you have caught the thread, then take it with a grip; and cut off its excesses.
But if it is against your artery or vein, then turn that part around and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them firmly in those two threads in the same way as you have made an incision around the apoplexy, so that they can penetrate; and tighten the apoplexy into four parts with the needles.
And if you want to, stop the needles and let the place heal on its own until it is healed, or cut off that part when it becomes thin; but if you want to keep it longer, then cut it off with a sharp knife, and if it needs to be washed, wash it thoroughly; and heal the wound in which there is blood.
And if the prominence of the navel is made of flesh or by moisture, then cover that you make the absces to be herewith it and drain the pus or the moisture, which is there, and promptly cure that it covers and solidifies the place.
Chapter li.i.
Of the treatment of the skull.
I have said, in the division, of the kinds of skull and in what way it is to be treated with medicine, and that it is an innovator in the treatment to do it by iron so as not to be ulcerated; and I have said that a skull is conceived in the main and with caution in the treatment.
And they said that some skull-heads are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, namely, when it is in the breasts or in the crotch and similar to the members allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it is starting small.
But when it is old and big, do not cover it because I cannot heal that wound nor have I ever seen anything like it, nor that it has come into contact with water.
And the operation on it is that you go ahead and place the patient and purge him of black cholera with some pills, and promptly bind it if there is a manifest re-occupation.
And promptly prepare the patient for the operation, and prompt the surgeon with the tools that will cover him; and promptly cut from all sides good thorough examination so that it does not cause any of the wounds of him to break open again. And let the pus run, and do not wash away that leeching, and squeeze the places, and abstain from that gross blood throughout your body or with the tool with which you can manage the instruments.
But if you have a contrary feeling of that gross blood of a vein or an artery, then cauterize that within so that the flow of pus stops, and promptly cure it with the other treatment within so that it is healed.
Chapter liv.
Of the treatment of hydropesis.
We have already said, in the division, of the kinds of hydropesis of water and the signs of each kind, of the treatment with medicine.
And that which is cured by iron is not but the kind of algals alone, and it does not approach iron to the kind of tympanist or to the kind of hypopares, for water is deadly.
And when you have already treated this kind of hydropesis with medicine and do not confer your medicine, then consider that, if it is already achieved in the patient's recovery, or it is another kind of illness, namely, if it is in his throat or belly and similar to those, then keep back from giving it iron, for there is a fear about it.
But if you see that the patient is of an exuberant virtue, and in him there is no other illness but hydropesis only, and not child nor old man, then the way of the operation on him is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the servant raises it to its belly, pushing water out from the penis by means of a sponge, and promptly perform a spasm according to this form:
it should be of two sharp parts long, from the
And now consider whether the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, because it seems that you have cut away three times as much at the navel, on the right side of him, over the fifth rib.
But if the generation of dropsy is from a hernia in the belly, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three times.
And if it is from the mesenteries, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not cut away over the rib where you want to place the patient, so that the superfluity does not run to that place.
And now pierce the entire cord with the instrument, and now enter into that section, and lift your hand up to the spoon between the cord and the scoop, and you shall empty out that one; and if the quantity is a finger or less.
And now pierce the scoop until it reaches the desired place, for that is where the water will go. And now remove this one and now enter another instrument of which this is the form: It is similar to a silver tube that is very thin; it is made of silver or tin or lead, and at one end of it there is a small hole, and at the sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is turned back according to the feather-like method, so sometimes:
And at the upper end of it is an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then in that moment it must be lifted up on the instrument, so that it evacuates the water in half a measure, for if you evacuate from that less than you reach in that moment, very much weakens the patient by resolution of his animal spirit, or happens to him five times closer to death.
But evacuate from that according to the virtue of it and according to what you mean by the dispositions of the disease of the pulse of it and the goodness of it.
And now remove the instrument, and keep back the water which causes this because it is kept back by the cord that keeps back the hole that is above the scoop about which I have told you that you should pierce it according to this method.
And now repeat the instrument for another day if the patient is tolerant of water, and remove from the water a small quantity, and let it flow gently over fear, and beware of an error within that does not run out of the water but little.
But if you are afraid of the disease, and let go a great quantity of water, then that one should be buried in dry sand, and its froth on the bath, and wait for a long time under the sun; and that one should be cured with drying medicines within.
And now cauterize over the stomach, and the mesenteries and the belly remove water from the patient, according to what I have told you in that water there is preceded.
Chapter LVI.
Of the treatment of children who are born with the places of urination not pierced.
Some are born with the penis inside the womb and the head of the mix (or is not straight or is not in its place).
So therefore it is necessary to pierce it as soon as it is born with a small spoon according to this form:
And now place on the hole an iron pin of lead and connect it, and do so for three days or for 3000.
And when he wants to urinate, let him rise and urinate; and now return it.
And if you do not stop the lead, then it is possible that the urine which goes on that place, does not allow this closure.
But that one whose hole is straight should be cured with an iron pin of lead, as I have said, for many days within which it is increased in size.
But those in which the hole is not on its place, should be led out, which causes this because of them, that one who is born with the head of the penis is the end of the testicles within it, so that he cannot urinate at the front, within it; and is not a generation, for then the semen cannot come to the mother according to its rectitude, and is a disease that is slow.
And the way of doing the operation in it is that the patient should be placed on his back, and now extend the penis of him with your right hand for the purpose of its extension, and cut off the head of the penis from its place by means of a sharp knife, or do not cut any part, so that the water of the penis comes out similar to the head and the hole falls into its place according to what it reaches.
And beware that in your operation of the flow of blood, because it is not safe for him; and now pause at him with water that he cuts off the blood, and cure the plague within which if it is cured.
Chapter LVI.
Of the treatment of the scrotum on the penis and the corruption, blackness, and adhesiveness of it.
Are seen in the penis and is a prominent piece of flesh.
And of that one, one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Not malignant, you shall suspend it with a small oil and cut off that one within which it grows whole; and now place it on a piece of cloth under water, and now wash that one with Egyptian ointment; and now cure that one with the ointment every day until it is cured.
And if the albater is malignant, of a red color, then do so that you prepare cauterization near its incision and the reason for it.
But if the albater is in the scrotum of the penis, and one part of it is inside the scrotum and the other part is outside, then do so that you hold the albater which is inside at the beginning within which it hardens; and now cure that one which is outside, because when you cure that one by holding the scrotum, it is not certain that it is not torn.
And already there are seen in the genitals and in the scrotum blackness and corruption, therefore do so that you conquer all that has already been blackened and that is about to corrupt or is already corrupted; and now place it on a piece of cloth close to water, which is made with flour of sesame and with three times finely ground eruca and trita.
And now cure that one with the other treatment within which it should be cured.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer cauterization with the moon according to this form:
Because cauterization with fire is in two positions, so it is in the flow of blood and in the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and has been destroyed all at once in that hour, then do so that you introduce a tube of lead into its meat so that the disease urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the scrotum to the penis (and this adhesion does not happen unless it is in that one whose scrotum is detached, and on it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion happens for plague or for abscess) cut it out with an obtuse knife so that it dissolves the flesh and frees the head of the penis from all parts.
And if it is difficult to cut off those beautifully, then do so that you cut away with a sharp knife the head of the penis and the scrotum, and now is because the scrotum, when it is thin, is very easily pierced by its thinness.
And separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis as much as possible with water, so that it does not adhere to anything else.
Then clean the skin with a wet swab until it is solid.
Chapter LII.
Of the washing of children and of the treatment for those who have circumcision.
Circumcision is not enough for continence: but since it is part of our operation and our will, and because it is really useful in children, we must set out a better method and lighter course if we want to recover what has been lost through their fault.
Therefore I say that the children of the freemen do not circumcise in some of their countries, because they do not use circumcision in their laws, but because they have acquired it by experiment, which is why I have amazed most of the artisans and barbers with circumcision and purification from the foreskins and scrotum; and they use a clean thread and a sharp scalpel on the foreskin.
And I have seen all these ways; and I do not find a better way of circumcision than with the forex, with a clean thread, because the hair slips off more easily above it, since the cord of the prepuce is between two tunics, and the towel is above them, and it is easier to force another cut there, and it will surely cause more pain. And the circumcision that is done with a knife, and which is done by men, is not safe to cut off the end of the male member, because it goes very deep into the flesh.
But in the operation with the knife, you will surely hurt and corrupt your own operation. And the child's foreskin is short by nature, and it does not look like that which requires circumcision; and I have seen this one.
But of the circumcision that is done with a knife and a clean thread, the goodness, experiment shows me that this is not true circumcision; because the sharpness of the knife that cuts makes it so deep that it is difficult for it to come out; and therefore, when you press your hand in proportionate length between two sharp things, and cut it according to a comparison at a certain time; and it is done by compressing the skin to form a shape containing the foreskin of all the penis, and which does not make an error from all.
And the first operation is that you should hold the child firmly most of the time if he is small, so that it does not move; and that you should put the thread in the skin of his penis only a little bit, and that you should release him on the next day.
Then do this with all the care in the world so that it receives your intelligence. Then do this with the child between your two legs, prepared and not nervous; and hide the scissors in your hand or on your thigh, so that the child does not see them or any of the tools.
Then put your hand on the child's penis and blow into the foreskin, and pull it out as far as it goes; then circumcise him from what is added to the skin of filth.
The shape of the knife for circumcision, this is the shape:
Let the extremities not be sharp and the others be sharp; so that there is no edge of the claw, and the length of both sharp things be like the length of two hand-grips held together.
But the error in circumcision is that it cuts off the foreskin completely, or it should be cut off; because it is a very deep cut.
Then I say that you should put your hand in the shape of a hook before the place where the thread is tied; and cut according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your hand, then take it out with a knife and cut it.
But if they have passed three days, and it is swollen, then do not cut it; but leave it until it has come down, and wash it with water, and cut it with ease; and circumcise it according to the preparation that you have made for yourself.
And keep away from the head of the penis, because it will not be good for it.
Then care for that child with water so that it is cured of the fever of the powders which I have recommended in the treatment of the powders.
And if circumcision is done with the foreskin over the measure, and follows the shape above it, then do not know it to him.
But care for that child with water which we have said must be cured.
Chapter LVIII.
Of the treatment of urine held in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is done by obstruction due to fear or cold, or due to powder or food, and similar things, according to what we have said about ways of treatment in the division.
And if the urine is not dissolved by water which we have said is violent; then I say that the cause is on the sick person; and you should deliver it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It is made of silver and very thin leather, like a long finger in length, and at its end like a needle of ash, so small as to go through a thread; and make it very sharp.
And the manner of delivering urine through it is that you should double the thread and tie it well; then put its end in the hole at the end of the leather or cane by a good knot; and introduce the end of the thread into the cannula with haste, and cut off what is superfluous with scissors if there is any cause in the leather, but insert it into the cannula with force along with the liquid.
Then lay him on his back, and wrap his bladder with cloth; and put oil of roses on the penis and pee; then wash it well.
Then introduce the cannula with ease until it comes into contact with the head of the penis; then double the thread above that point and tie it well; then insert the thread into the cannula until it contacts the bladder, and that is enough unless it arrives at the cause that is empty; and if it does not arrive at the cause, but goes in the wrong direction, do so according to this order: first make a small hole in the place where you want to go.
And so stretch out the bowel slowly, because urine dries up the wool.
So take out that one for cleansing urine, and use a ring, dont stop making the water go in until the bladder is emptied entirely and the patient is given relief.
Chapter .lix.
On the quality ofbladder cleansing with a water-filled bladder and with an instrument that agrees to water.
When a bladder ulcer or abcess appears, or a perforation has occurred, and you want to distil water and medicine in it, then use an instrument called a clamp-holder, and this is how it is done:
unless at the end of it is deaf, then it is closed. And in that there are three holes: two from one side and a third hole on the other side.
In the beginning it is a tight place, where water is collected, and as much as it opples is added there, except that whenever there is a cause to remove moisture from it, it is removed, and when it is expelled long, according to which clamp-holder is used, oil of naphtha is applied to the ends of the vessel in the sea battles.
So whenever you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clamp-holder in the moisture, and shoot at the water that is pushed forward through its holes, because the moisture is shot into the cavity of the clamp-holder.
And so insert the end of the clamp-holder in the rope according to what we have said in the ring; and so shoot the moisture into the water that is shot, because that moisture arrives at the bladder and at the patient's navel as well.
Form of the subtle hook to which the bladder is hooked, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or lead, which looks like a small feather at the top, and place a small bowl inside it neatly.
And so take a bladder by movement, and place the humidity you want to crystallize in the bladder, and so connect that one between two clamp-holders with double fastening, and boil the moisture over fire.
And so insert the end of the crystal hook in the rope.
And so place your hand over the bladder with the moisture that is to be shot upward, in order that the navel may not be touched by that moisture that is to be shot up.
But if you don't have a bladder present, then take a piece of pigskin and make a circle of it; and pierce that completely all around; and so insert the clamp firmly in those holes, some turned, and so add the ring as it was added before, since you are not stopping the water that you want to introduce moisture, and pour and water.
And so put that one in the instrument and make it on the bladder, and express your hand within so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lix.
On the extraction of urine.
We have already said in the division of urinary ingredients and the cure of it with medicines, and the difference between urine generated in the lungs and urine generated in the bladder, and the signs of that one.
We have already said about urine in which catarrh operates, and its section.
And the urine generated in the bladder itself is that which is retained in the bladder.
And I will now present that one with a clear and concise exposition and abbreviation.
Thus I say that urine generated in the bladder mainly comes out with children; and of the signs of it is that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the navel rubs its ring, and there are visible traces of it; and at the water there is a sound like a rattle.
And it is difficult to cure children with that, until they have reached twelve years old; and it is difficult to cure the elderly. But in young people it is half-cured by water, because it is between those.
And of that one whose urine is greater and the cure is easier; and if it is little, it is opposite to that one.
Thus when we come to the cure of that bladder, cover at the beginning of that bladder what we have said about the hook used to extract all the content from it; because that crack prevents the spread of urine by means of a probe.
And so take the bladder from behind with a probe and place it in its cavity, or that one jumps from one place to another.
And so insert that one between your hands prepared, and the hands of it are on the sides of its contents, so that the whole bladder is turned downward in its holes.
And so turn that one and all of that outside.
So if you feel the urine in the space, then sit down soon after sectioning it off.
And if you don't leave it completely wet from behind, then cover that one with a ring of oil; and rub that one with oil, and insert it in the navel of the child, or the half-grown youth, and place that one on the navel. And turn the urine inside until it is outside from behind. And you turn that little by little, until the neck of the bladder.
And so press that one with your fingers on it, and shoot that one outside through its holes; and after the place where you have sectioned it off.
And order the minister to press the bladder against his hand; and order another minister to extend the genitals towards the holes on his right hand, and pull back the ring that is left behind the genitals, from the place where you make the section.
And so insert an inkwell into it, and this is its form: And so split it into the water that is between the genitals, not in the middle place, and return to the back of the left hand; and make the section over that urine and the child's words are in the rear, and so make a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and narrow inside, according to the amount of urine that is generated for it, and no more, because firm pressure splits the child's words that are at the back of the bladder, and so forced out.
And you should know that there is no water for which one to lean or turn away; therefore, the excretion of it is difficult by means of water.
And that urine is like milk, and is round, and its excretion is less frequent.
Thus if it is that one which is to be leaned or turned away, place in the section.
And if it is not like that, then cover that one on it, or hold it tightly on it with a firm grasp, at the end of which you are to push out that one; or insert something sharp into that one from behind.
But if you can't stand on it, then increase the height of that one slightly, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off that one with vinegar dissolved in three parts.
But if the urine is more than one, then at the beginning you shoot your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and so section it off on it; and so insert a small amount of water; and apparently make four, if there are more than two.
If there is a great deal of pain, you must be unaware that you are cutting into an area with a large nerve, as the patient can suffer either from living with the pain or from frequent urination due to a blocked bladder, since the area is not completely solid.
Then may the minister expel what is inside as well as what is outside, or engineer a fracture of the leg with pliers in order to extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe juice and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rosewater and rubbing alcohol, so that the wound may heal more quickly.
Then return the patient to his bed on the third day.
And when he has been unwrapped, clean the area with water and oil, and apply a poultice of vinegar and oil within which may be healing powder and tar.
Then if in the wound there is an ulcer that hurts and burns, and from which urine escapes (and this is known by the exit of urine), then cut into it very narrowly with a sharp knife, since if it remains it may cause blisters and gangrene to develop in the bladder, and putrefaction to occur.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to all kinds of poultices, with water that carries away the medicine within so that it may heal.
And in all hours of the day you have applied both pillows and adjusted the medicines that were placed on the area.
If the pain is slight and it is located in the middle of the foot, and there is no urination, then do not attempt any kind of surgery, since three times has this treatment prevented surgery; and if you spray water on it, and if you insert a steel needle into it lightly, for this is the way:
of a triangular shape, pointed, and firmly inserted.
Then return the patient to bed, so that the pain does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the needle into the foot with ease in order to pierce it. Then turn the needle in your hand slowly, and you will pierce that small spot with it, and then pierce another spot on the other side of the foot, since the urine is soon relieved.
Then place your hand on it where the pain is on the other side of the foot, since that spot is tender and there may be a rupture due to urination, and the patient will be healed.
Then if this treatment is not suitable for you for some reason that prevents it from being applied, then return to the patient's side and apply another treatment. Then cut into the pain in the foot between two pieces of cloth. Then extract it. Then remove the bandage and clean the wound with water.
It is not necessary to return the patient' side bandage to his body, but it is to prevent the pain from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above it, since when the bandage is removed, the pain returns to its location, and causes a wound.
Then for this reason, when you remove the bandage above it, you must raise the foot up, or else it will return to its original position and cause pain again; so do not take off the bandage above it until then.
Capitol.
Of extraction of pain from the female patients.
Pain in women is usually slight.
Then if you experience any pain from any of those treatments, the treatment for that person is difficult and should not be applied using certain methods.
One of these is that a woman's strong body makes her difficult to handle.
Another reason is that you cannot find a female who will drink medicine when she is pregnant or breastfeeding, or is married to someone.
The third reason is that you do not have any female doctors with this skill, mostly for surgery.
The fourth reason is that the location of the surgery on women is far from the site of the pain, so you would not feel any pain during surgery, and there would be a risk of death.
Then if necessity forces you to do this, return when you have found a female doctor who is skilled in this matter, and only a few are found.
Then if you are deprived of that person, search for someone who is gentle and subtle, or present a female wife who is respected in the matter of women, or a woman who practices this art well.
Then present her, and order her to do everything that you command, from the examination of the pain until the beginning; which is why she should check if the woman is pregnant, then return her to her husband' side, and let her feel the pain.
Then if you find that person, remove her from her husband' side, then order her to mark the area.
Then if she is not pregnant, order the wife to place her left hand on her bladder, and press it gently.
Then if you find that person, gradually remove her from the opening of the bladder to its edge with her finger, and let her feel gently where it hurts most.
Then place her finger gently on the area where it hurts most, and let her feel where it is located in that spot, and order her not to move away from the pain with her hand.
Then the incision should be small at first; then insert a needle into that area, and if it hurts, adjust the incision slightly according to the quantity that you know the pain will travel from that point.
You should know that there are many types of pain: some are small and sharp, others are long and round, and some have edges.
Then you should know how many spices of pain there are for each kind of pain that you can feel on your body.
Then if you want to check for fever, place three drops of vinegar on the spot and inspect it after an hour; then resume your operation before the pain disappears.
Then prepare yourself with the instruments that are said to be used in extracting pain from men for your operation.
Then if you want to check for fever, and you know that the discharge of pain is due to the opening of an artery, then place some powder on the area, and apply a pressure cloth tightly; do not repeat this, since a strong person may die from blood loss. Then heal the wound.
Then when the pain becomes less sharp, you return to your operation before the pain disappears.
Capitol 62.
Of surgery on hernia.
Hernia is nothing but an addition of moisture to the skin, which is left behind by the genitals containing water, and it is called cyphac.
In some cases, it is in the proper skin layer which nature has prepared in the middle of the genitals, separate from each other like two husks; and this is the codena of the genitals between the skin containing water, which we have called cyphac, and it is not water but a substance like honey.
And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which occurs in the genitals, so that this substance is infused into them, and sometimes it happens by injury made on the genitals.
And this moisture is not moted in color, for the color of it or is declined to citron or to bloody, or rust, or is black, or is thick white, and is that water which is most.
And the membranes by which it is drawn out are these: for if it is in the white cipha that I have said, then the apoplexy is gradually declining a little towards length as well as with figure of a bull, and appears on the genitals, since the moisture is present there.
And if the moisture is in the proper pannicula, then the apoplexy is gradually departing from the bull, and for this reason one supposes that it is another bull.
And if the moisture is between the genitals and the white cipha, then let him put a cushion.
And as you wish to know the color of the moisture in the apoplexy that is placed between them, then let him examine the color of the moisture at the edge of the incision from which it has come out; and according to what it has come out of the edge of the incision, judge from that what is inside.
Therefore when we come to the cure of it by fire, then let him order the patient to be fidgeted if that is possible, and often wash his clothes.
Then let him be raised on a bed a little higher for some time, and let him put some sheets under him.
Then let him be placed on the left side of him, and let the minister follow on the right side of him, who extends his cane to one of the two legs between the genitals and the part where the wonder of the belly begins.
Then he takes a long spear and cuts the genitals at their root along the length near the penis.
Then the section should be made according to the rule of distance from the line that you wish to make on the genitals, as far as it reaches to the cipha white in all its extent.
Then let him extract it, and observe, and keep for this that you do not scratch it; and your extraction from the edge of the bull should be suspended a little more finely and carefully examine the extraction according to the quantity that is possible.
Then he pierces the cipha completely with water by a wide perforation, and removes all the water.
Then he separates the two lips of the section with a finger, and extends the cipha to its extremities; and do not touch the genitals together in all their extent, and extract it in that way that is possible for you. Then extract it in all its totality or in pieces, and primarily its lower part, since if you do not scrutinize the extraction with care, the water will not return.
But if the bull is made to come out of its root at the hour when you have finished the section of the cipha, then return it inside, and then join the two lips of the genitals with a suture, and then care for that as well as for the other illnesses, until it is healed.
And if the bull is corrupted by some other illness, then let him be lifted up by its suspenders, and extract it, and then care for that with water which we have said.
But if the water is gathered in two parts, then you will know that they are two hernias; therefore examine those parts according to what you have done to the other; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
Then you should wash the wound and immerse it in oil or rose oil; and put another cloth over it which you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread that on the genitals and the wonder of the belly; and open a towel and powder, and lay those open by means of this form:
Then put two clothes and make them wet with wool or water; and attach those extremities by means of a belt or of wet wool, and attach them to the underwear of the pants, and the one of the extremities should be taken from the rear between the legs, and the other to the part where the panty begins, and two extremities should be placed on two cushions which are left, and two extremities on two angels, and all attachment should be made in the belt of the underwear.
Some people treat this hernia with surgery instead of cutting it out; and it is because you should cut the genitals with a fine knife and make an incision according to what we have said; then you should make an incision in the form that I have described, and if you discover white cipha containing water, then make cauterization according to this method: and it is placed in a Greek letter.
Then the cipha should be pierced, and it is burned in such a way that all moisture is discharged.
Then the cipha should be extended with needles and extracted with needles, and extracted by burning with a subtle fire; and extract it according to what is possible for you as far as you drive out all of it; and guard against the fire that the fire does not touch.
You will know that this operation is closer to saving and further from blood loss, and better than an operation with a section.
But if you have discomfort during the section or during cauterization or blood loss, then let him know what discomfort you have in return; and cure that with which it agrees for him.
But if the hunchback is not very great, and does not expect the second operation for its horror, then administer an incision according to what I have said here; and it is when it is certified by you, according to that which has been said of signs, that this hernia is fluid.
Then let him be placed on a raised platform, and pierce the apoplexy in the part that is lower for a long spear, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
Then make the incision wide in such a way that all the water flows out.
Then let him be placed on the area where he has cut it, and let him leave it, so that the water runs away from it. Then care for that in such a way that the illness is healed.
But if discomfort is to the excitement of water in that hour when you pierce it: and water does not come out except by that which the white pannicul in the orifice of the plague makes discomfort and prevents the exit of water, then let him put into the plague a small or instrument with which the water is extracted from the plagues; or adjust in the constriction of the plague a little one.
You will know that water returns, and it is collected in a vessel within a few months or years; and when it has been gathered, then pierce it according to that method which I have said; for the hunchback will live its days that way.
Chapter LXIII.
Of Section on Hernia and the Treatment of It.
You will know that in the section on this hernia is more dangerous to perniciousness in the major cases; but it is seen that its dismissal is and be saved by it for the better.
I remember the operation of the apoplexy and the spices used in it.
Therefore, I say that the apostems come to those whose genitals are joined together and occur for various reasons: or for acute excess of fluid, which is poured into the genitals, or for a blow.
And it is the color of the apothema according to the color of the body, and does not turn pale in pain, and it is a heavy apothema.
And a heavy apothema is the lapidated one, of which the color is dark, and there is not a feeling of heat.
And some come because of the knotting of the arteries, and because of the swelling of those where it is already perceived the return of life, or because of the swelling of the veins.
But that which comes from the swelling of the arteries is known by the disappearance of the apothema when we press those who tell it; and it does not seem that this touches.
But that which comes from the swelling of a vein, by no means has its disappearance due to pressing those who tell it;
And it is possible that this kind of apothema be caused by a section and on the other carns; and it is because you place the knot of the genitals, and approach the knives to their joints, and extract that of white cypress, and remove the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them together, and cut off those above all the joints of the knife.
Therefore, if the meat has already been hardened at those places, then you cut off that meat and cut it up.
And if there is an adhesion for any reason in the middle of the genitals, or between them, then you cut off all that adhesion and cut it roundly.
But if there is the birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you cut off all that which belongs to him, and extract the testicles thus: you take them by the scrotum and hold them with one hand;
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with rosy oil and clean it well; and take care of that other cure until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the Cure for Hernia, which is due to heat.
There is an apothema wrapped in something that resembles grass for the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move or walk on the patient's back.
And in the cure for this disease is due to fear because of which there is a return of life.
However, you may say that surgery on those second ones, having first performed it on the first.
And I say that you should place the patient on a raised platform; and approach the suspenders of the testicles to their joints; and hold the knot of the genitals with your hand between the legs that are stretched towards the knees; and keep those other servants who you are, and stretch them outwardly with force.
Then cut with a sharp razor across the middle of those vessels on the right side where they are uncovered vessels.
And then remove all that in one piece as if we have said above in the extraction of arterial tissue that is in the temples.
And then fasten there one needle which is twice as strong, and tie that in the first place of those places where it happens to be vital, and tie another veil in the last place of them. Then cut those at their middle part with a right-hand cut according to the length of the body, and remove that which is joined together with the corrupting and putrid humors.
Then care for the wound with a cure of the other wounds that you want to heal by producing them; for it is not good because of water.
But if all the vessels are cut off, then the testicles should be extracted or, because of water, that they are torn away from the vessels; for they would lack nourishment by the cutting of the vessels and would wither away, or because of not being fertilized.
Chapter LXLV.
Of the Cure for Intestinal Hernia.
The coming of this hernia is because of the cutting that is done in the middle of the white cypress which is extended on the belly from side to side of the navel's miracles, so that when those bowels break out through that breach they go into some one of those bowels.
And that breach is either from the middle or from the extension of it; and these two species come about for various reasons: or because of a blow, or because of noise, or because of clamor, or because of a sudden elevation for some heavy reason, or because of the resembling.
And the sign of that is, when it comes from the extension of the middle, that it comes little by little over a long time and not suddenly; and it is an apothema within the navel because the middle cuts into the bowels.
And the sign of it is when it comes from the cutting of the middle, for at the beginning there is a violent pain; and it is an apothema that makes a sound different from what is near, and the body trembles because of the extension of the middle.
And some come out with the bowels' cloth, and it is called this intestinal hernia zyrbal.
And some come out with wind, and some run in the bowels' fissure; and here it is re-absorbed, and at the water is a great harm to the patient, and some cause bad and greater pain when it is pressed.
And in the cure for these diseases due to fear, so that he may escape the danger of being caught.
And the manner of performing that operation is that you order the patient to return the bowels to their cavity if he obeys your return; and place his hands between your mas, and raise the feet.
Then tie the knot which severs the genitals at their joints, and cut the knot entirely by the long; and fasten there two blades of a knife according to what you wish to eat; and then place those blades on both sides where you would cut according to your desire.
And if the cutting is according to quantity that it is possible for you; then from that take the testicles, which would be taken away through the hole.
Then remove those white cypresses which are hard to cut at their joints, where they are uncovered; and place the knot of the genitals between them to keep them from moving.
Then you cut the testicle with the knife that is between cypresses; and which is hard to cut at its joint, leaving the knot of the genitals between them to keep them from moving; and cut off those adhesions which are behind the testicles.
Then cut off the knot of the genitals at their joints, and stretch the white cypresses on its sides with your left hand, and lift them up to their joint; and command the servant to hold those testicles in front of you, and dissolve that adhesion which is behind by a complete solution.
Then examine the genitals with your hands to see if there is any cause of the bowels being wrapped in the hard white cypresses. But if you do not find anything wrong by touching; then place that one on your belly from behind.
And then cut in two places that loop that is of the testicles by section from which run blood and pus, so that this does not happen again as we have already said in what we have said.
And then administer soaked wool in oil, and place it on the wound; and that thread that we have said is placed (and some of the loop white is cauterized, which we have said to place next to the cutting because blood may flow) and leave the thread inside so that it falls by itself.
Perhaps if the bed-clothing is late, then water should be boiled, and placed on it according to what we have said.
And then heal the wound with the other healing of wounds within that it is healed.
Chapter. LXVI.
Of the windy hernia.
In this windy hernia, there is nothing to be seen that has been burned on the healing of it.
And the first said that it is done thus as we have said in the hernia that is on the leg; which is to say, that you place the vessel next to the section carefully; and then cut on its own edge with oil into which run pus and blood, so that the vessels fall.
And heal the wound as we have said within that it is healed.
Chapter. LXVII.
Of the droop that happens in the ankles.
Some break in the ankles thus as we have said, and the place is removed.
And do not put any of the intestines on the genitals; and if you do so, there is little; and return to it in all hours.
Perhaps if the time is prolonged with it, a split appears in the loop within that the intestine is put on the loop; and this happens because the loop stretches, and then becomes soft and the place runs pus; and it is removed.
And the healing of it is done thus as has been described before.
And some are healed with iron according to this way: and it is that the patient jumps on your two legs between your hands, and then cut off the place of the split pus by section for the length according to three inches.
And then tighten the white loop that is under the testicles within that it is uncovered.
And then pull the thread and place it on the edge of the loop, and pull it from the navel at the same time.
And then cut off the two edges that are on the end of the loop, and adjust it with a stitch from one to the other.
And then remove the end of the thread, and do not cut off the loop completely, nor extend the thigh, nor any other cause as we have told you in the healing of the entestinal hernia.
And that is healed with the healing of wounds, and when you cut off the threads, wash it and restore the wound within that it is hardened; for the loop contracts and the prominence of the split is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to being saved.
Chapter. LXVIII.
Of the softening of the testicles.
The testicles of some men are softened by water because the flesh between them is softened, and the watch is kept.
And then, in the healing of it, let the patient lie down according to his two legs, and cut off all the loop that is softened on the natural loop; and then make a double stitch with it.
And if you want, cut off the superfluity of the loop that is softened by three or four cuts and a firm stitch.
And then cut off between the stitches; and then heal by healing of the other wounds within that it is healed, and let the threads fall.
Chapter. LXIX.
Of castration.
You should know that in our law castration is prohibited, except for the reason that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except by two ways, of which one is that this is done in the science of the doctor when he asks about the healing of him on whom it happens; and the other way is that we need to castrate other animals for our pleasure because of them, as with donkeys, and horses, and pigs, and animals similar to them.
And therefore say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting off or splitting by section.
And in that which is done by cutting off, the way of the operation is that you should cut the animal's tail with a sharp knife within that its genitals are softened and made weak and let them hang. And then take those with your hand within that they are relaxed and do not appear to be cold by the touch.
And in castration done by splitting and sectioning, be sure that you have the animal, and press the testicles of it with your left hand.
And then tie the suspenders, and cut off above each foot with a section within that two feet process in front of it.
And then cut off those that are pus-like to you; and take away each excoriation. And do not leave on the loop any cause, but leave the loop on the vessels that are under them.
And this way of castration is better because it is done by cutting off, for cutting off strengthens the loins so that the beast does not desire to copulate.
And then heal the wound within that it is healed.
Chapter. LXX.
Of the healing of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears that the space in the loop of the testicles is cut; and this is a figure of a woman's cunt, for which there are two testes.
And some of that man has urine in the loop of the testicles.
And in women it is one kind of sex: and this is because the figure of the woman over the penis is as two testes of man a little less than half of what it was before; from the man's figure and his two testes.
And the healing is according to three kinds: of the two men, and of one kind of women. And it is that you cover those meats adjusted within that it removes the taste of it; and then heal those with the healing of other wounds.
And in the second kind of men of whom you see urine in the loop of the testicles, there is no healing or operation for it.
Chapter. XXI.
Of limping and of meat prominent for reasons of women.
Limping that is strong is adjusted on natural causes within that it is stretched and it does not stop the watch; and in some women, it is enlarged to a great extent as it is done in men when they copulate within that it is spread out.
Then you have the superfluity of lancing your hand or finger and drain it.
And do not finish in incisions, mostly in the membrane of the brain, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
Then properly cure that with the cure of the wounds before it is healed.
Might a newborn child is a child that lies in the womb of its mother until it fills that, and firm is to come out before the parts of the forethought according to appearance of cow (and therefore I will call this "cauda malautia"); then properly cure that with incisions before it is healed.
Chapter .lxxii.
On the Cure of Gout
A gout is that the ring of the female is not pierced, or it is a small hole. It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is by gout that has preceded, and this is caused either by ill-prepared meat or by subtle rust or spice.
It is either in the womb of the mother or in the legs of the child, or in the pus on top of it, or in the pus below it, and also prohibits bleeding and engaging in sex and childbirth, and firmly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of this is done by looking at the moon, if the opposition appears, then surely; but if it does not appear, then you seek that with the help of tools or from a beam.
But if the opposition is by subtle rust, and it is between the two lips, then you cut and break it.
And that you place over the two lips powder, and place the fingers of both hands in front of them.
And the woman is on her back with her knees open, and place your hands over them with force until that subtle rust is broken and the opposition is opened.
Then return the lamb to the place where you keep the olive oil and place that over the area, and rub it with your hand every day so that the place of incisions is not consolidated.
But if the rust is thick and spicy, then you have to lance it with a needle of lead or a leaf of mint.
But if the opposition is by food, then suspend that with oil, and lance it.
And are given to you the medicines that stop the flow of blood by biting, also with an acacia, and blood of dragon and endives, adjusted to milk of cow.
Then administer a wide lead needle that the plague is not consolidated excessively.
And hold it by the two sides and administer four times of a day with warm water.
Then properly be cured with another cure of consolidation before it is healed.
And in some cases it happens during the conception of other meats, and then properly lance according to this way. But if it is for hard meat, that hard meat in the womb has not caused a contradiction to be made in any way.
Chapter.lxxiii.
On the Cure of Hemorrhoids and Thrombosis that Occurs in the Vagina of Women.
Hemorrhoids are the appearance of small veins that run from the openings of the vagina, and if they become swollen, they are called acute hemorrhoids, and if they are old, they are called chronic hemorrhoids.
You have already heard what is said about those and their signs, and also say those that receive the cure and those that do not receive the cure.
Then say that hemorrhoids and thrombosis are when they are in the womb and do not appear in the sense of the woman, then in those there is no cure with iron.
But those that are in the opening of the vagina over which a woman feels pain, those are those who are cured.
Then place the woman in a cloth of friction and place those with the scissors or an ugly cloth, and lance them with the razor blades and cut them with the razor.
Then sprinkle on those the flow of blood from one of the powders that you lance with a bite, also with an acacia and similar to these.
Then wipe your feet with a damp cloth for an hour, then place that in warm water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then let that be boiled in a broth of sweet herbs and pepper and cloves and similar to these.
Then return flour of wheat and make a paste with honey and wine, and put it on the two legs with your hand.
And if the blood is separated, then let it be; and otherwise, put it together with two windows, and make an incision on the nipples.
Then return the lamb and immerse that in juice of coriander or of wild carrot or of grape must with your hand, and let that place be cured within it; and this place is cured from within.
Then cure that within so that it is cured.
Chapter.lxxiv.
On the Perforation of the Vagina in the Womb.
Small veins occur in the womb, and if they are hard and painful and ulcerous and pustular and wart-like and painful and thorny and other small veins. I have already said these diseases and the signs of those and the signs of those, and the cures of them in the division.
Then I say in this treatises of perforation how you do the operation with your hand if you want to know how to operate.
Then you have to consider if the pain of the perforation in the beginning is acute with percussion and blood flow, and if that hardens and becomes painful over it, then do not pierce it, and cure that with water that helps within the maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
Then you have to cut the woman on a bench that has two benches; and lean her back with her legs spread apart from the waist, and pause her knees below her, and tie them with a thread next to the water.
Then the woman follows behind him and administer the instrument with which you will open the opening of the vagina, the shape of which will be according to those cases that will be proper.
And when you want to administer this instrument that your hand be on the ring of the vagina of the woman, and that which enters into the vagina is not more than the ring of the vagina and all the child. But if the instrument is larger than the ring of the vagina, then you have to place over its texture in the ring of the vagina so that it does not prevent the entry of any instrument into the ring of the vagina.
Then you have to place the water that runs in the instrument from above and the minister has the instrument and turns it until it is filled with the opening of the vagina.
Then when you feel excitement, and it is touched with your hand, and it is wet, then you have to dry that with a sponge.
Then when the flow is stopped, then you have to place in the pus a needle dipped in rose oil or green oil and stop the bleeding in the section in the ring of the vagina.
And he dip his hand in clean water and rub it on the head.
Then, if it does not heal by itself within two days, put a paste of it into the wound and wash with water until it heals.
And some are washed with milk and water, until it hardens like a crust; then dip the wound in water in which raisin or barley seed has been soaked, and dip it again into the poultice.
If the wound is deep inside the head, you are forbidden to use any medicine on it until you have washed away the blood that has collected there; then you may use the water in which raisins or barley seeds have been soaked for a long time.
Chapter .lxxv.
Teaching midwives how to bind the wounds of women according to the diagram, in order not to cause nature to be disturbed.
A necessary cause is that the midwife recognize in advance the natural figure of childbirth by the signs of the woman; and it is because when you see the woman express herself at the time of delivery, and she has a desire to smell the air, and above her there is something that comes out of her, and she hurries to give birth to it, then know that this delivery follows the natural figure, and that it is this one which comes out from above her head, or hangs down from her navel.
So that the woman's belly is relaxed, in order that the fetus may gently descend because when it comes out over her head, it comes down; then let it be delivered, and with good hygiene deliver it from those excesses.
May that which is the other part of this natural figure be unlawful, because when the fetus comes out it is on its feet and over its head; and the mother's back, or the breast, is before her head and her feet; and her mother with one hand. or it is on its head and her mother, or her navel; and it has a firm hold on the side of her head, like those natural figures that are not lawful.
A necessary cause is for the midwife to be wise and skilled in all matters, and to guard against error and deception.
And you will show all these figures, and what is hidden in them so that it may be understood by water, and rest on top of it.
When the fetus is brought out over her head by natural effort, and this delivery is difficult; and sometimes the virtue of it has already been destroyed, then let them cut off the hair, or let them apply fenugreek poultice, and wash with water.
Then the midwife will place herself between the woman's legs, and cut off that hair with a small blade, or rub it with her own hand, until she has removed all the moisture from it. Then press on the woman' belly so that she gives birth to the fetus.
May she not deliver; then let the woman be crusted with a poultice of foxtail and a poultice of fenugreek applied.
And let her be put in the crust until it hardens, and make her sneeze with a towel, for sometimes the fetus is stuck inside; and close her mouth and nose for an hour, because after this the fetus will come out by itself.
And if two more of the fetus are stuck at the beginning, you shall decrease them little by little with ease. May she not obey the instrument; then let her sit on a stool and lift up her feet, and let the stool be placed on the ground; and the woman be held so that she does not fall down with the shock.
And if the fetus is not turned inside and dies; then let them be cut out of it, and take out the fetus with it, for it will come out easily.
When the fetus comes out on its own feet, you shall encourage it; then make this little one turn over and over again, then pick him up with your hand, and put one of his legs into your mouth to pull him out.
May the fetus come out between the legs; then you command her to contract herself, and make her sneeze with a towel, for sometimes it will come out by itself if God wills it.
And if it is not stuck with water that I have described; then you return the little fetus little by little until you reach the second natural figure, because this one will come out easily with a slight movement.
And if it is forbidden to use all the water that I have described; then take a poultice of oak and of gum dissolved, and pound it well in the mortar with a good blow, and put it on the navel of the woman, from the bottom of her belly. And let him make a cut in the water that flows, so that he may achieve the hypochondriacs.
When the contractions of the woman become less frequent; then apply to her sniffing with mint and stopping her breath. When you have sniffed her with mint for an hour, then let her sit on a stool, and make her sneeze, and open her mouth wide, and press the lower part of her belly slightly; because the fetus will come out easily after this.
Delivery of the fetus hanging downward from its own feet. She is to be put in a state of relaxation; but if she cannot be relaxed, then lift her up and let her go down.
If she cannot go down; then let her lie on the ground, and encourage her to sneeze with a violent blow, and administer those which I have described to you of the poultices.
And if the birth has come; then let her sit on a stool, and study how to put the woman in relaxation, and take the fetus into the natural form, and encourage the woman to sneeze, and command her to contract herself until she is stuck.
Delivery of the fetus on his back, with his legs and feet spread out, and his head between his legs, and his hands behind his back; the feet being higher than the head. Then let the midwife hold the fetus, and let her turn it little by little with ease.
And when it is stuck; then let it be turned over and over again, then pause on the navel with that water and those poultices that I have described to you.
Then order her to contract herself little by little, and when she has given birth to the fetus, let her sit on a stool with her back turned to the light, and let her be slightly bent forward, and order her to sneeze with a towel. The exit of the fetus prepared over the side.
When it begins to push out of the mother according to this method, consider, and then you cut the second one with your fingernail before it is evacuated from the moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the neck, then you cut that of the umbilical cord so that it is not held and dies.
Then you push the fetus into the opening within until you hold it, and sends the woman that presses herself several veils, and the lord outside if not light, if God wills.
The exit of twins or a bunch of fetuses. Know that twin fetuses are natural, and sometimes there are three or four, but this one is strange and hard to believe; there are five causes for a fetus to be dead, and not alive.
And count them, even if they are multiplied, a second one, and separate them with a string, distinguishing those entering the navel of each of these; And sometimes veils are separated by chance as it is a fetus naturally light, and some veils are separated by chance as it is a natural fetus light.
And if they are difficult for them to achieve the pregnancy and reach the water that we have spoken of natural figures, then you care for them as we have said.
And if the woman is subtle and makes water that facilitates and subtlety, and tardiness, and is ingenious according to all figure according to which it is prepared of the engineer bringing salvation.
Remember that it is formed in the womb from embryos and Aborted are.
Some are formed in the mother's one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and ten times, and it has been verified that a woman can get pregnant six times, and another ten times altogether, which causes pain to be felt by measuring the glorious wise ones.
And all this covers that is in the science of the woman how strong it is to that small similar to water, and therefore stops at water that is small that covers.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the removal of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus with water that we have said in the division of medicine and is not outside it, and you necessarily use surgery with hand, then consider if the woman is of healthy virtue and is not from the accidents for which she is a lost cause.
Then consider that the woman is lying on her side, and her head is turned so that her feet are raised.
The minister should hold those two parts or be tied on the side that the head does not extend too far for the extraction of the fetus.
Then you wet the mouth of the mother with water to drink, and with astringent of althaea and fenugrec, and with semolina.
Then you dip the woman's hand in water and in astringent, and then bring it closer to her body, and then close the door where the nails of the fetus are located.
You place it in a convenient way: then consider if the fetus is prepared to put on its head, and then you fix the nails into its holes, or into its neck, or its mouth, or its palate, or leave it with a beard, or its fork, or the locations near the ribs, or leave them in the hypochondriacs.
And if you send it over its feet, then place it on its back or side.
Then consider if the nail is on the right side of the body, and pause the curve at that place which is between the ribs of the left side, and bring it with ease and fix the nail in one of these places that we have said, until it reaches the cause by water.
Then you pause and fix in the position another nail, or third if necessary, so that it is a trap, and not an extension according to its rectitude, only.
Then it is better from the beginning, so that the light of it is relieved in this way as it is made in the natural way of its root; and it is necessary to extract it with care, lest there be an infection.
Then consider if it is in water that the extraction is softened; and if any part of it is held, then consider that the woman dips some string what we said to the oil, and brings it carefully and turns it with a stick, and dip it into water that is held.
Then if the part of the fetus is lost, then consider that the nails are switched; and do so in such a way as to put all the fetus out.
And if the woman is relieved in front of the other one, and it is not possible to reduce that by the curve of it; then consider that it be wrapped over that; and you extract that within that all is out. And cut that or at the junction of the hand or at the wrist.
Then consider that you draw the other hand and the two feet.
And if the head of the fetus is large, or happens to the curve in the extraction, or it is on top of the water that is adjusted; then consider that you dip between the fingers spiky and sharp, and cut the head, and extract the water, or remove this one with an instrument called "alundada," whose shape will come close to the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which is suitable for it.
Then consider that if the fetus is of large head by nature; and then consider that you cut that with a tool, or take that with an instrument "alundada," as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is out and is curved by nature; then consider that it be cut within that water that is spilt on the feet.
And if it does not complicate or die by nature, then consider that you cut the head as soon as possible according to your power.
And if the fetus is left in the womb it is an abortion or it is in the water; then consider that you make a hole where the moisture is located.
And if the fetus is over its feet, then the attraction of it is light and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is light.
And if it is curved by nature above the belly; then consider that you extract that with cloth in which you wrap around your hand, and cut the belly and remove the water within that.
And if the other members are held and turn the head; then consider that the woman brings her left hand; and if the mouth of the mother is open, then bring it with the right hand, and take the head with some string, and throw it into the mouth, and then dip it into water.
And if the mouth of the mother is curved by water that it is like in the apple; then consider that it does not disturb above it; before you consider, bring a stream of moist air. And administer emollients; and follow the patient in water that softens and moistens.
And if the fetus is over its rib; then consider that it is curved: and give to drink water that we have spoken of in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then it should be cut out and extracted.
And as for any causes left inside the second one.
And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer the medicine that we have talked about for the cure in the eyes, which happens because of the main cause.
And if there is a flow of blood from the eye, then it should be washed with stinging waters and then administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in her womb who was dead, and on top of that a pregnant veiled woman, and when the fire died out, the other one also died. Then it happened to him after a long time an eye discharge in his testicles; and it swelled up inside that fire, and began to burn.
And I was called to treat him, and I medicated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Then I stopped it with some causes of strong attraction, and he discharged an arm from him, and after a few days, another one; and I was very astonished, because in the womb there was no arm.
Then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I cured the plague and extracted all of the bones, the woman remained in her own position, and I treated her in this way for a long time, and she got some relief from the pain of one arm.
And I did not think it was strange, but because in that there is science and helping the sick with artificial means for a cure, administer medicine.
of the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the dead fetus.
Shape of the turn that is opened by the mother:
This is the shape of strength in which you are bent over, and in which bending there are two turns at both ends of two limbs. But this turn, however, must be less rigid, and it can be made with a boy's rod or a boy's stick.
And the length of each is a palm and a half; and the width of each is a palm and a quarter, and the thickness of each is a palm and a little more; and the width at both ends of each is two fingers, or a little less.
These two additions are to be placed in the mouth of the mother so that she can open herself when you turn her two prescribed turns.
Another shape resembling that, but less rigid and lighter:
Be made of wood or sticks according to the appearance of forceps. But in the end of him there are two additions like this, and the length of each addition is a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with these, then place her on her back with her feet hanging down, and it will be between her thighs. And then open your mouth with the instruments in the same way as you would with forceps, according to the quantity that you want of the taste of the mouth of the mother before the medicine reaches it.
The shape of the turn that they called the little ones:
The shape of the push that is pushed with it:
The shape of the grip that holds the head tight:
And it is assembled with forceps that have teeth at the end, like this, and some veiled women are done with them in this way according to this shape, with teeth, and they are cut off and held tight with them. The little shape of the grip:
The shape of an uncircumcised penis:
The shape of an uncircumcised penis with two spines:
Form of the staff have two extremities on which the head is abseced:
Form of two spatulas:
All of these instruments are exercised, and when the spices of that are multiplied and prepared by the artificers, how much is put in the operation and how much is put on men for their quantity.
And do not work of those instruments that is what it is necessary you should prepare, because the need for these is not excusable.
The extraction of the second.
When the second is kept you command to the malady that it retain its ale, and approach that he stinks with condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of him and over his nostrils, and if by this it is out, good is.
And if not, then you take a wave and pierce in the covering a troch and stop in that herbs burn the mouth of the mother, so soothing and rough and it comes out and chamomile and Arabic and cassia and linden wood and saintly herb. All of these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the wave, and stop it on the fire.
And approach a cannula of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that within which the evaporation comes to the concavity of the mother.
And approach that he stinks so as has said, and the second is gone out with speed.
Mays if remains close this cure and not is discharged, then you command to the woman that it submerges its left hand in olive saponaceous or in a mixture of mint of altea, and approach injects those in the navel and seeks after that the second, and when he encounters it, then you take and extract that little by little Mays if is annexed to the preon of the mother, then injects its right hand that have repeated, and when has found the second, extracts that little by little according rectitude so that the mother does not catch again the violent attraction. In advance of which is changed to right and left with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed, then we have repeated the cure with sneezing and with medicine of the wave with herbs.
May if is not forgotten by all the causes that we have repeated, then you keep that not you do again to her in a sequence of abstraction, but when it comes out from him to the mouth of the mother lies in the cushion of the woman, and approach cristallizes that with oil and tetrapharmacon; because this will putrify that appropriately days and is dissolved and is forgotten.
May when they are putrifying, it is of him elevated bad odor to the head and to the stomach, and that leads the malady; and then approach are administered sub- fumigacious and convenient to water.
May some of the Ancients are already putrefied sub-fumigacin of nasturcium and dried figs.
Form of instrument am which the woman is sub-fumigated is what it is necessary you retain menstruation and the second:
Be made of virgins or spayed one.
And be stopped the subtile extremity in the navel and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigacin is stopped over the braziers of the fire.
And keep that within which it is consumed that sub-fumigacion and repeat - another one.
The cure of the rear end of the unperforated child.
May children are not born yet and their rears are not perforated, those which already has made subtle and bright. And approach to the woman that it perforates its rear with sputum in advance, and keep that not it touches water.
And approach stop over that wool of smoke in the wind and oil; and approach cure that with oil within which is bright.
May if you fear that it will be bright, then approach stop in the troch a cannula for some days, and prevent that when the child will want to change.
And that happens already bright of the rear because of consolidation of plague or of abscess; and then approach is cured with water that we have said of the cure and the dung.
The cure of the fistulas that involve them.
Fistulas that are involved in the opening of pus is put into a sequence and thickness of those that are involved further from the rear or in the space of one opening.
And it is a fistula or some drops.
And with that sequence is aged and is corroded by the acrid white or subtle putrefaction, and some of these fistulas are penetrant some.
And those penetrant are recognized by water that is discharged of them for the egress and for ventilation; and some times use the exit of the woman, and strongly is discharged of them from those.
And so of those fistulas some recognized in the space penetrant into the bladder, and within the meat of the urethra; and so of those penetrant into the junction of the navel and into the neck of the uterus.
And water in which the fistula is penetrated into the rear and not penetrant, it is what you put the virgin's saying in the rear, and injects tries of spayed or of iron in the fistula when not it is used.
May if in that is used, then injects tries of spayed or of horse hair within which you feel the attempt or the hair on the virgin's saying.
And if you do not feel that one completely or process any cause of egress or wind or ventilation, so as has said, then you know that it is not penetrant, and then prepare for the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrated into the bladder or within the meat of the urethra, then the sign of it is completely of urine of that and prohibition of that at this moment that the place to the medicine is consolidated.
May if it is penetrated into the junction of the navel or within the bone and injury of pain in the opening, then the sign of it is what the attempt penetrates here if not it is used within the bone, and injury of pain in the opening of the rear; and that of it is putrifying always; and that it does not enter into that medicine, nor is consolidated with oil.
And in all those fistulas penetrant is not cure completely, and the cure of those is work and vanity of the medicine leaves about which are closed.
May if it is not penetrated and is not aged, then the cure with iron is hoped according that you have recommended, and that already has heard and has used.
And it is what the woman dances between her two and raises the cambas of him within them, and the coyssas are inclined to the navel of him, and approach injects tries of spayed or of iron if it is used in the fistula aged, within which you know the place where the attempt penetrates.
And if that woman turns the man around, then you approach injects the virgin's saying in the mouth.
And if you feel in the virgin' s saying the attempt has already penetrated here if not it is used in that cure, and then you know certainly that that is penetrant; and then do not work in that cure, because it is not in that cure.
But some say that it is healthy for some men to be tough.
And for the medicine by which one hopes to revive him, you should ignite a subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, and in this way, when it is preceded, and enters into the fistula until it reaches within that it comes into contact with the flesh; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that they are all attached those tissues that are like feathers of a goose.
And then heal those with bandages wrapped around that it reaches all of those tissues that are attached, and then heal those with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if healed, it is good; and if not, do not heal them in any way with another treatment.
And if the attempt enters and does not reach insidel the master says that it is in the anus, and between the attempt and what is velament of flesh or of skin, and sometimes the fistula in something that touches the surface of the penis, then dry the penis from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if they are dried, and if not, separate them by a knife, and it is released through the fistula into that part where the tip of the attempt reaches, and thus the attempt is freed and cured.
And then clean those fistulated tissues that are attached to a tube of a goose's beak, and they do not leak due to some other cause.
But if the flow of blood comes out between you and your work when you are inside those tissues, then the milk that is and of the pus should be cleansed with a sharp instrument, either by fire or by acute medicine, because cauterization by fire fixes well: so it is attached to those attached tissues, and it removes the dry excrescence of the moisture.
And then heal those with bandages wrapped around or with a trisse of flesh inside that place gets swollen, and then quickly heal the plague with a strong fire that generates and consolidates hard flesh.
And thus medicines in which there is stringency and excision; when they are restored, they are already healed, and you do not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus' surface and is elongated, then the master says in the anus and examines it.
And so if the attempt is a hundred and between you and it is velament of skin or of flesh, and it is about to penetrate, then there is no operation in the syno in which one does not have trust and hope.
The cause is to administer it in a way of three methods: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it out within that you can reach the cavity with which one can possibly enter the fistula, and if necessary, separate them by a knife so that they do not cut the skin containing the penis, and to come across the patient's back slightly of their own will; and then heal those with water that we have said, because it is strong medicine that heals; or to elongate that velament and make pus that you dry out within that you can reach the anus' cavity, as we have said, either by the attempt or by another instrument with a sharp end, and then clean those fistulated tissues that are in the section within the anus, which you can do by perforation; and then try to restore the whole plague with a cut, and if the pus hole above it is not consolidated, and the fistula opens at the base of the anus, and leave pus out through the patient's back. And in some cases the fistula ends according to this method: when you enter the attempt into the fistula, and it is at the back of the anus' surface next to the penis, then take an attempt with a sharp end, which is thus how one prepares wounds according to this form:
and put it inside the envelope of five fields or into those; and then enter the attempt in the envelope within that you can reach the cavity,
But if it penetrates in the back of the anus slightly inside, then you take out the envelope from there, as you enter the master in the anus; and you pull out the end of the envelope and adjust its two extremities evenly, and you cut them both, and you leave it there for a day or two, and when it bleeds more, put it back into the flesh, and you can see those tissues that are between two extremities of the envelope that fall.
And then heal the plague within that it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrate, then make it so that it penetrates in some way, as it is not your task to do it so that you do not cut the skin; and then make it so that it is healed.
The shape of a pointy thing for the fistula to split: its curve is sharp and the other end is blunt, so that you do not cut it where it is unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
Of stitches of hemorrhoids in which blood runs out in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids as if they were made of wood, or because they are made of fat flesh. And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them at any time, and they are just below the anus, and on their two ends.
But those that are outside the anus are according to the second: because they have little moisture, and from which yellow water or a little blood flows continuously on the skin, and according to the color of the skin.
And the cure for those inside the penis is that you order the patient to sit and press within so that the penis relaxes, and the hemorrhoids will appear to you. And then you cut yourself and hang them on a nail or what you have in your hand, and then cut off their branches.
But if the nails are not holding them because of their moisture and softness, then take them by a sharp or rough edge of a cloth, or a piece of stone or wool, and pull them out by the roots, and cut them off at the base where they join the body, and dust over them some powdered herbs appropriate for cauterizing, so that the blood does not flow; or cauterize them according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterizing. And then heal those with the other cure before they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey the exit, then christen the patient with a small biting, and wash it with water that is in the penis and which obeys the exit slightly.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is slight, and it is because you pick them up with your fingernail or pick them up with a nail, and cut them off, and then heal those with water that we have said within that they are healed.
And that person who performs the incision, let him prepare sutures for them according to this method: take an envelope wrapped with a field and put it in a needle, and then pull out the emorrhoid by its two ends, and wrap the two ends of the envelope around the head of the needle, and so stretch the emorrhoid strongly, and then cut it with the needle, and you leave it there; and then remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one of them uncut, so that the excess blood runs from it.
And place on his rear side a drape in rose oil or in wax; and that one over the back, and commands the patient to rest. And he lets fall that which is inside a box; and when it falls, he heals those with oil or with another cure within that which is to be cured.
And with this old medicine that is not good for those things, let it be that you cut those things at the tip of a spit or at your own nail into moist humors and fed upon those by pus from above, which one forbids to consolidate; and he heals those within that are consolidated.
Then let it be that you cut those things with a very sharp pus that the first within that are to be cured and are inflamed, and he heals those within that have been cured.
You know that if it is red in the whole body and more so in the legs and feet, and especially on the toes, and also because of which there is pain throughout the entire body, then one should be concerned about the liver.
And then let it be that what is incised there is removed from the nail bed or with oil, and that it is cut off from its root; and he heals that one.
And if you wish, cauterize the second that precedes in the foot.
May be a wart is a small, round, painful swelling on the surface of the body, and such things are seen in many children.
And for the treatment of it is that you spread and incise it or that you open it with a chisel or within what is inside a box. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
May be a fungus is a small swollen area on the skin, and when it comes into contact with something, it feels like a fungal infection, and it happens all over the body.
And for the treatment of it is that you take a tube from a pen or from a whip, and press hard, and place that one on the fungus within the circle of the tube, and then turn your hand around the tube; and he heals those that are on the side of the meat by pressing the tube against them, and cutting off the fungus from its root.
And if you wish, make it with a steel or iron tube according to this form:
May be the tip of the tube is made to go in easily, silent (if it is not a piercing one), wrapped around what that turns it from side to side.
And if you wish, cauterize the fungus as we have said in the cauterization of athyium in the capitulum of cautery.
Of the shape of the instruments that are used to administer therapy.
Some are made of silver or lead or fused or hammered; and some are made of small instruments and large according to those with which they are administered, because those that are administered in the treatment of small children are small; and those of those that are painful or painful are small.
The shape of a large crystal:
May be the tip of the tube is wide according to this way: and its distance from where the bag is tied in such a way that it may fall there several times.
And the end of it that is to be inserted into the anus is silent  (if not pierced) and is turned slightly toward the outside, being a small opening on one side and a larger one on the other; and that which is on the edge of the anus is made wider according to the thickness of the rays and larger at the end.
May be the bag in which are held the medicines of animal bladder or of sheep's skin, and its handle be a palm.
May be the opening is made with sharp edges as it is turned; and if the space between the edges is large according to the thickness of the finger.
And it is inserted into those sharp edges with a strong thread of a red wine, which should be of the color of blood, and adjust to one the bag; and when it is placed in that one the bag, it is made straight on the tip of the crystal between two different and strong pressure, and he cuts each hole: May be the quality of cutting through one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and you must not let it fall too much or become too sharp.
And then the patient is to be raised on his two feet, and the bed lifted up so that the feet are over the footrest, and the minister takes the bag and presses it with two hands and forces it out into the body until all of it that is in the crystal is emptied; and he removes the crystal and the patient moves his legs away from the wall.
And if the medicine forces it out of the body by force, keep as much as you can; and if it sleeps in that one for all a night, it is a sign of recovery.
May be if you cut those things with a sharp knife according to the treatment of flatulency and the pain of the gut, then do so within the crystal that is to be healed.
And if there are in the anus painful hemorrhoids or pus-filled cysts, then use a very small crystal; those of those with which children are treated are made small.
Of the treatment of blisters.
You have already said and done in the division of the treatment of blisters that it is convenient for the foot, and I say thus the treatment of those with feet and medicines according to the complaint.
And so I say that blisters are different according to what causes them and according to the place where they occur on the body.
And the causes of blister formation are due to heat of the weather, or incising a space or a knife, or striking with an axe, or with a spear, or similar to those that cause blisters.
May be blisters that are in the places of the body are due to a blister that occurs on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment of some blisters in order that that reasoning and rule may be applied to the other blisters.
And I will begin with the simple blisters of the head, because the remembrance of the composed things will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
And so I say that when it occurs on the head a simple blister is not broken, then consider: if it is because of heat or similar, and you have already tied up the knot so much only and it is a large blister and you are worried about a pus blister forming over the head, then you rest and take a light diet for some time, and do not delay taking medicine; and extract from it according to the quantity of its virtue if there is no other cause that prevents you from taking light food, especially if the blister is small.
And it is the flabotomy of the opposite of the infected part; and keep the patient from eating rich food and from eating thick foods.
May we then of the minuteness of the matter for any cause, let it be lessened by the food and not brought near to meat or drink.
And pause over the wound if it bleeds, a drop of rose water or wine let be put on it or in it which is dried up.
May we then if it is certain that the wound bleeds, pause over it, if it is recent let him sweat and put air on it not having changed that powder which I will recommend to put small.
And if the air has already changed that powder, then pause over ashes wet him up until it is healed.
May we then if the wound is large or by cut of a blade and similar things, and the lips are not closed by pustules, let those be sutured according to what I recommend about suturing them.
May we then if the wound is already discovered from the bone and pen, and it does not retain it but only a small suspensory, let that be cut and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh to its place instead of coden, and command the patient that he eat food that is dry: cheese and fruitlet and similar things until it is healed.
And if the putridness in the coden does not adhere to the bone, then let you cut all of it and remove it, and cure it.
May we then if these wounds are artery or vein from which the flow of blood may come out, and it is not cured by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you do not cut that that does not heal, let you cut it with a blade, or let you pierce it; and if necessity forces you to put what we have said, let you cauterize it so that the blood be stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is little; therefore you put on those this powder, for once solid they do not change before the air.
And the way of the powder is this: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of non-extinct resin; all mixed together and well shaken, and if it is a wound filled with pus and confined by good constriction so that it does not adhere to it and coagulate on top.
And let you put those on the powder and leave it there, and not remove it while it is still like that so that it does not bleed, for it is not needed to be removed before being healed.
And some time later pour oil alone into the wound, when there is no need for you in present olive and dragon' blood.
And this operation should be done in large wounds when it is convenient to pause them on those and make them straight, and only recently wounded wounds whose air has not changed them.
And if the air has changed them, and mainly when it is in summer time, then do not put this powder on, but cure those with oil that we have said, or let you pause over them with a hot compress, or let you pause over their ankles with flour of ordi soaked in water and honey until they are healed; and let you cure those with other treatment until they be healed.
May we then if a fracture in the bone occurs and it is small, then you extract oil with gestures.
I will direct the cure of fractures in the head in the poison water.
Of wounds in the neck.
May we then if a wound occurs in the neck, let it not be treated differently from medication, and for wounds in the head when they are simple.
May we then if the neck nerves are cut or an artery, let them be avoided with treatment of water that causes violent contraction, and also to rub it and oil that is bitter and similar to it for nerves do not grow there. And let you not pause over the wound for any cause of all is fresh, for the substance of the nerves is fresh and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the pus of all members.
And if it is cured with light medicines, then let it be washed with double water, and put some drops of rose water in it, and wash it when it is washed with double water and other things to be mentioned below, and rub it.
May we then if the wound is large, then administer sutures or tie up the lips, and let those be cured with powder until they are healed.
May we then if the wound is deep or it occurs in the pus that is low broken, then pierce it in the place most sunken.
May we then if the wound is already an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or pierce it, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to put water on.
May we then if the spine of the neck is already broken and all of it, and the veins of the neck are only saved, then you adjust the lips of the coden with sutures on the cane of the neck and do not touch that; before doing so, make that one equal to its natural figure, and let those be strengthened by stretching them decently, and leave those for a few days; and let those be cured with rubbing in which contraction and excitement are caused until it is healed.
May we then if the wound in the bone has already begun to heal, then strike that, and if it has fragments of bones, extract all that you can; and if it is not covered with cloth, leave it until the wound is healing, and let those be separated and its relief be obtained.
And if the wound is recent then put on it this powder that I have recommended to you. May we then if the wound has become a fistula, then let those be cured with oil that will bring to mind that which is mentioned in the chapter of the head.
If it is a cut of a lance or a cut, and many times deeper, then consider whether the patient has fever, for the wound is dangerous. You will know that the wound is deadly.
And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with his sanc, then let you pause in it this powder for the first hour, and do not tighten that so that it does not retain his sanc in the depth of it and return to the pulse, but let you rub it gently, and leave that for two days.
And if the oil is not with you now, then let you pause in the wound a blade for sucking water that it has of humidity; and do so that the patient sleeps on the wound so that water runs through it.
May we then if the wound has passed three days or more and there is no spasm of the patient or tremor of the heart or constriction of it, and many times other good dispositions of him, then you will know that the wound is healed; and let you cure those with water and other treatment until they be healed.
May we then if the patient's healing is not finished and time has passed, then you will know that it has become a fistula; therefore let you heal those in his head.
And if the wound is by incision of a space or a cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with water preceded by sutures if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquellas pessas, si so separadas. If they are not separated, leave them in place so that the plague can be removed later, which is a relief.
And of the other plagues that happen to the other members, healing in therapy is the healing of water that we have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The discomfort that occurs in the belly is great, little, or mild.
A small rupture is difficult to repair in any way, and if you do not prevent the intrusion of them at their place, because they are open and thick, it will be difficult for the instrument to enter.
And therefore the smallest rupture is mild, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, and so it is difficult in the two mentioned above.
And you should know that surgery on the belly is done in four ways, and two stitches are common that also correspond to the stitches of the other plagues of the body.
And two other specific stitches communicate with the others, but only one is specific in the surgery of the belly.
And I recommend to you each explanation and description.
Therefore I say that when the plague is small and no cause has been found of the hernia for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, this is done in two ways: either because the rupture is very small, as we have said, or when the hernia swells with cold air.
And so when water is like this, then you must scratch it in such a way that you dip a sponge or a damp cloth in tepid water alone, or that you take some water from the sea, and cypress, and mustard, and mix it with the hernia before its swelling is resolved.
And some ruptures make water come out, and it is better than water alone in resolving the swelling.
And so when you see the swelling resolved, then you humidify the hernia with water that is slightly warm, because water relieves it for a little cause.
If the instrument is not suitable for this therapy, then you will have to cut off the rupture with a small instrument in which the hemorrhoids are embedded.
The first treatment is best when it is appropriate that it is not cut, and there is no need to dry out by habit.
About the instrument, tell me its shape:
Does the hernia possess the edge of the instrument or another way? The one end is acute, and the other end is not acute, and the subtlety is thin, and it is not the subtlety of a blade, its edge being somewhat blunt.
And so when the hernia is enlarged and comes out of its place, then you must reduce it according to its natural shape in its own place, if possible above water, because it is better.
If the rupture is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should put the patient on their back with their legs raised above their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the head of the patient and their feet higher than the parts where they are.
And apparently if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should pause your intention and consideration momentarily so that the part where the hernia is may be higher than the other.
And so you should prepare water for the large and small plagues.
In the small plagues, pause the water that is at your disposal, and so that the minister is between your five fingers, which has the entire rupture together with it and adjusts the lips of it, and so you discover the cause of the stitch in place where the hernia occurs.
This is the common way to sew: one that you hold the needle, or consider the needle according to the quantity of the plague's width; and so you leave the end of the rupture of the little finger, tighten the needle a little, or other than what you put into the two ends of the thread, leaving the ends of the threads inside, as long as you put that the needle enters that part; and you have added two ends of the thread and four orders.
And so you tighten the thread a little in the circuit of the needle, and some ruptures are made from two parts together, and so you add the two lips and the plague by addition; and so you leave the thickness of the thread and you fix another needle in it, and so you tie that with the first needle; and you do not stop making water if there is a need to make needles while you have not completed the entire repair of the plague.
And the small needles are between grace and subtlety, because the subtle needles cut the flesh easily; and the thick ones are a difficult instrument in the thread, so that by water you make them be of both subtleties and graces.
And I do not know that the needle is fixed in two opposite ends of the thread, because flesh does not easily cut easily; and the plague may become established before its consolidation.
And the stitch should not be prolonged so that the plague is not prevented from being consolidated.
And so you should insert the ends of the needles so that they do not cut the patient in his sleep; and you pause on the stitch of all parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and you leave them where you know that the plague has been consolidated.
These types of stitches with needles are more convenient for small plagues because they only require one needle or two or turn them around.
If the second stitch is done in a similar way: and so you provide for four ends, of the thread and two extremities of the cord, in one seam, with a needle that is wrapped in both grace and subtlety.
And so when the needle enters these four ends, you should reduce the needle from that part where it began to enter, so that the thread does not come out of its first part and does not separate; and the stitch should be according to a sutura de drap with which the draps are strong.
And you should leave between each stitch the quantity of the smaller thread half.
This stitch is good for men.
With this stitch I healed the plague that had affected a man in his belly, who was stabbed with a knife, and it was a rupture of two palms of his navel; and so I reduced it after twenty-two hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or less, and I healed that patient and it was cured; and so you should drink water for its cause to be discovered.
And the other limbs had not been healed; and by a miracle of faith, because I did not heal that patient with medicine, but I put him on the plague for two days, and he washed himself frequently with water from honey within which he was cured.
May you direct two special sutures according to the narrative of the Parable.
And that you begin the suture of the tendon, and introduce the needle from the outside into the inside.
And so with the needle penetrating into the tendon and in that place of the knot according to prescription and in length of all the thread, and leaves the end of the thread in which you have introduced the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity from outside to inside in the other extreme of the wound.
And so when you have finished that penetration, then do another penetration in that extremity of the tendon from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread that is in there, and make it penetrate into the other extremity from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread that is there, and make it penetrate into the other extreme of the wound from outside to inside.
And make it penetrate with that one of yours in which you do the penetration in the tendon in the extremity of the wound that is in the inside where everything enters.
And then begin from this side and make that one on the other side with the needle that penetrates in the tendon, and take out the needle from the knot, and make that one of yours in which you do the penetration in the extremity that is on the inside of the wound; and take out the needle from the other side of the tendon.
And do this one and another, and make this one inside that other; and do all of those things that are there according to that example.
And the sum of this method of suture is that you sew with a needle through the skin, and that you make one stitch on the tendon from the outside of the extremity; and leave that other stitch inside where it is complete.
And the second type of special suture that you will direct is called "Galia", and it is from the speech of him and for his recommendation; it is that you sew that second stitch on the tendon in the way that doctors do, adding all the thread to one side of it convenient according to nature; and apply the extremity of this one to the other extreme of it, and here is done according to what I have directed you.
And when you have the needle in the extremity of the wound that is in front of you from outside to inside, and make that one penetrate into the inside in this thread, and leave two extremities of the tendon; and then turn the needle around and make that one penetrate from outside to inside in the other two extremities of the tendon.
And then turn those cushions around, and make any of them penetrate from inside to outside in the other two extremities of the wound that are on the opposite side;
And this method of suture is better than common suture with thread, and it is a type of suture from which I have reminded you before.
This is the speech of "Galia".
And they call it "sutura del ventre", which is corrected with two needles, so you introduce the needle in them, and begin to make the puncture from this side according to the suture of those whom you have directed to sew with your hands; and make that one penetrate into the other side according to the method of suturing with hands.
And know that when there is a rupture in your belly, the suture of it is more difficult than that of other places in your belly.
And the judgment of the medication of gout is the same as for the other gouts.
And it is caused when you get the gout recently before that air changes it, and reduces the hernia and sews it up well; then apply over that blood-red dust.
And if the air has already changed the gout, then apply over that with water and those who are in it, so that they do not make a hard lump and fall out, and that they are consolidated tendon and wound; and then treat that one as you treat the other gouts according to what heals them.
And if you do not have the medicines, then apply over that for a little while, because it begins to burn, and change that one of those every day, as I have taught you, according to what heals them, because you do not need any other medication when gouts are simple.
And if you are afraid that the gout will spread to other limbs, then apply that you immerse wool in oily solution with a quality of water, or in rose oil, and leave it there; and apply over those places that are between the joints and leave them wet.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your hernia, because it is not visible, then apply a black stain on it with the vi stiptic, and more so if the putrefaction has reached the hernia and there is an outlet penetrating inside the cavity of it.
And know that those who are in your belly are more likely to heal than those who are in them are in a small belly; and that those who are in the belly are more likely to heal than those who are in them are in the gut.
And it is difficult to heal because the hernia called "gynecomastia" does not receive the gout that gets into it from all sides; and here is due to the great number of veins that are in it and to its size, which is small there, and to the proximity of that one with nature of nerves.
And if what you are doing for the gout is the same as that which I have directed you to do, and you reduce those hernias according to my prescription with hands; and if it is the recent one, then reduce that one according to my method of reduction with hands.
And if it is passed on to that space and has already become black or green, then apply that one with a string over the place that is corroded by it, so that blood flows out; because in the belly are veins and arteries.
And then cut off that one with the other string, and make two extremities of the string hang from the part of the wound where they are at the outside; so that on your side is not attracted what you need for the repair of that one, because it is necessary to make a small hole in the belly through which flows out blood.
Remembrance of gout when it happens in the hernia.
When there is a small disruption in the hernia and it is possible that it will return to those men; because I saw that one which was stat plaguat (gout) on his belly with a lance, and that gout was old and made a fistula, and it came out from its stomach and had a fever and a feverish feeling.
And then you see that the treatment of it is not certain for its healing; but leave that one inside where it is cured and the place is consolidated.
And then I saw that the place was consolidated, and I left on your belly the accident of the bad one in his stomach; and do not do anything else, but enter into a bath and exercise yourself in it.
And they say that when there is a small gout in the hernia, then apply this method: and it is that you take a piece of cheese with a big hole in the middle; and then place those two pieces of cheese on the mouth of the hernia, and stretch them; then when you put one over the other and squeeze them together, cut off the top part of it because it adheres to it and does not dissolve.
And then place another formiga next to the first one; and do not stop applying those formigas like this according to the quantity of all the gout.
And then remove that one and cover it with a cloth; and those attached caps to the intestine, until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
And now it is possible that the intestine is latched onto a thin thread that comes from the animal's intestine; because you take hold of the end of these intestinal threads and it is sharp; and it is because you grasp the end of these intestinal threads, and it is sharp, and then you wrap the end of them in a thread, and then you put the thread around those needles and tie them together with that thread, and then you cut off that part.
This way of stitching with sewing needles is only a secondary and backup method, but it is a reliable and hopeful one.
Maybe if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the thin intestines, because then there is only suturing and not healing completely.
Of cure for the swelling and the fistula.
Know that any swelling or pustule that becomes red and swollen, and is a ulcer, and does not heal and keeps getting bigger all the time, and does not dry up, but rather gets worse, in any member, is called a fistula in general, and we call it a boil.
And a fistula in truth is a hard, white, and painful wound, and it is concave like the pain of a bruise; and for this reason it is called an alcus rizat, that is to say, a wound.
And it is in men's wet wounds, which keep getting bigger; and the moisture dries up in some hours. And sometimes that moisture becomes dry, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is thin.
I I have shown all these causes, and they are linked to those, and the treatment of them is discussed in the text on medicines in the division.
And I have shown you how to treat a fistula, which is done by surgery with the hand.
Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because they reach the large and small arteries, or nerves, or bowel, or bladder, or any of the spinal bones, or any of the joints formed by two bones joined together, and this is due to the nature of the hand or foot. And from these similar causes arise those that affect the near parts of the main member; and they are called fistulas according to their location.
And therefore of these fistulas, the second type is difficult to heal and does not respond to treatment, and it takes a long time to heal and requires work and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas is very deep and does not reach those locations that are mentioned above, and you wait and trust in the healing of it, and want to gain knowledge of it; then try to pierce or sew it, and if the fistula goes according to plan, and you inquire about it.
Maybe if the fistula is very twisted, then investigate it with a thin iron rod, because an iron that has light weight and can move the body's shape is easy to curve out of the twists.
And if the fistula is not very large or terrifying, it is not in your power that you can examine it with an iron rod.
Then clean the opening with a sharp knife, because the moisture that you clean out goes to the other openings and runs from them.
Then inquire very carefully, according to which method you can understand whether there are bones or nerves here; and it is the concave shape of the fistula that is far away or near, or it is a fistula with only one opening and it is over this; completely covering the whole body with your dressing, and inquiring about the causes and the accidental factors of the swelling.
Then when you have considered all these causes at length, then go to the treatment according to confidence: and it is that you consider if it is a fistula in a nearby part or far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places I have mentioned to you and said.
Then you clean the fistula according to what has been said before in the description of it, and those who have been said to be in the fistula; and from those who are in the fistula, some are born in the opening of the flesh, or in the teeth and similar things, and heal them within it.
Maybe if the fistula is very deep, and is following its course, then clean it with a sharp blade as much as you can, and then remove all corrupt flesh from it; and then introduce sharp medicines into it, and put them within the concave shape of the fistula, which you have understood with an iron.
Then put that medicine into the fistula, within a few layers of cloth, so that it corrodes everything that is rotten in the concave shape of the fistula because of the acute medicine.
Then restore it with clean clothes that generate healthy flesh within which is healed.
Maybe if it is not healed by water, then you cauterize it according to what has been said before.
Maybe if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must examine it, then you clean it according to what has been said before; and if you do not find any cause of vein or nerve or main member as I have said.
Maybe if the bone is discovered and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you clean out all that corruption completely; and then heal it with water so that it is healed.
And if it is not healed and it gushes out completely, as when it has dried up, you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and then you discover again in a second examination and very carefully the reason for it and the cause of its origin; and then restore it.
And if it has been healed, then it is well; but if not, you know that the corruption is in the depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and then in that you must keep looking for a cure.
Maybe if the bone is corrupt it is small, or if you can reach it; then throw it with sharp tweezers that are useful for this purpose and to cut off any part of the body that is corrupt.
And if it is only bones, then very carefully remove all of them, and do not leave any cause that can harm you with your strength.
Maybe if you have any opposite causes of the moisture, and in their cutting there is neither fear nor mistake; then cut those limbs or flesh if it is here, and free the bones.
Maybe if you have not prepared yourself to cut the bones of your body, then pause over the wound with a knife that can be used for this purpose; and let that wound rest while you cut the limbs from the flesh and limbs, leaving the wound in place where those bones were cut from the body, and keep the wound covered so that it is not healed, and keep the section that you have cut in your operation.
Here is the translation of the first sentence in this text:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation of this sentence: The shape of the saw
Other shapes of saws:
Form of another great line:
Form of line: The shape of this line is according to the shape of the starry claw, and the points of it are according to the shape of the althazic points.
And there is not a need for anything else than that those be cut if they are rotten at the joints, or if it is the large open mouth.
Form of the lesser razor:
Form of a lateral razor:
Form of another proper line: Be it done with a certain line that is made like an arc and its sharpness is forged from iron, and the member is made like a knife in a proper way. Form of him:
Form of a razor in which there is a depression:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved extreme end:
Form of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Form of another lesser incision:
Form of another incision; this one resembling a line, and its extreme end is a little saw, and it is exhibited in places on the bones' edge:
Form of a line that goes to the shape of that which pierces the bones:
And its extreme end is triangular and has an acute tip.
It is made of Indian iron, and its appearance seems to indicate that all the causes that we have mentioned of razors, of incisions, and of saws.
Of incision's extreme ends and of the locking of the bones.
The extreme ends may be pierced or, for an intrinsic cause, or for an extrinsic cause, or if you do not cure those diseases with those medicines, and if sometimes the corruption does not affect any part, then it is said that the patient should remove that member from within which the corruption arises, because the bad influence goes away by water from death or from a malicious thing, which is a greater defeat of the member.
And the sign of that person is that the member becomes black within, so that it is cured when fire burns it, or if you cut off that blackness near that part which causes the corruption, or if it is removed far from that part which causes the corruption in that member which affects all the body; and therefore, cut off that member.
And in general, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous things, then such as from a scorpion, or from a bat, or from a rat, and from similar things.
And if the corruption or piercing is at the extreme end, then you should cut off that part and not give space for the corruption to go away, so it does not enter the body.
And if you are affected in the arm, then you should cut off that part of the edge of fire, and not give space for the corruption to enter into the body's fire.
And if instead of that member, then cut off the arm in the junction.
And if another corruption or the vice moves the patient's body, then that person dies; and a quantity of virtue is administered in order to cure it.
And if the corruption occurs at the foot instead of that part, then cut off that part within one of the feet.
And if it is in the heel of the foot, then you should cut off all the foot. Or if it is in the instep, then you should cut off the instep within the junction of the instep.
And if the corruption has already affected the heel, then there is only one remedy, and that is to remove it; and let the patient die.
And the way of cutting off a member or sawing it in half is that you tighten the ligament at the joint further, and then strengthen another ligament on the spot; and extend the ministering ligament to the spots further apart, and then strengthen another ligament on them; and then separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, and then cut off or saw it.
That is done with a sharp knife, or with a pointed one, in order that the ligament may not be cut and that the patient' harm may be adjusted and that the swelling may subside quickly.
Or if you are working while there is a fever, then you should cauterize the place with care, or put on it some powdered resin; and return to your medicine until it is finished.
And then bind that member which is infected with a ligament that suits it, and cure it within so that it heals.
I recommend to you that you go to a man in the service of whom this mistake occurred, who is black in his leg due to a fire that was burning together with him.
That corruption first occurred in his foot, which extends to the whole body.
And then that man prepared himself in advance to cure that member with the same urgency as his pain and his thirst for it, and he cut off that foot within the junction, and fire healed it.
Long time passed before it occurred to him that corruption in the man's arm occurred by accident.
And then he went to me, and then I repaired myself by applying a medicine on the body, with the change of the man' mind; and the excess of that medicine did not affect him, and it began to act on the other arm which had been affected first.
And he called on me to cut off his arm, and I did not want to do so, hoping that there would be no effect from that excess medicine, and yet I had to cut off his arm at once, because the man' evil was greater than his good.
And then he left me, and returned to his own country, and sent for me that man; and I cut off all of his arm, and it healed him.
And I will not add any more to this narrative except that it is useful for me who can understand it, and that it may be beneficial for others.
Of cure of diseases and quality of clisterization with medicines.
When there is a swelling in some large members of the body, and the space of that swelling is prolonged within so that it does not collect pus, then it bursts and pierces, and drains off the pus from it; and if it opens up towards the back as if it were a vein, and if it opens up in the way that the skin separates, and does not come into contact with bone or nerve or ligament, it is called an abscess, and it is not named a fistula.
Or if the space is prolonged in such a way that the corruption goes into another member, then it is called a fistula, and not a lump.
And the cure of it is that you cut off all that cord, and more so when it is softened and made thin with a cloth; and you ensure that it does not stick to the place because of its corruption.
Or if you hope that the cord does not adhere and that that corruption has not succeeded by a last consequence, and if it is opened in front, then you cure it with a clister.
And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you are considering has an unpleasant odor, then clisterize it with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, honey, and vinegar mixed together; and place it in a vessel, and apply fire to it until it boils and reaches the top.
And so you take from him that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and make a clister with it to the stomach, tighten its orifices, and leave the medicine with him for two hours.
Then extract it with care; and make water for so many days within that it purifies the stomach and restores the appetite.
And some enemas are made with ash-water, when you do not have this medicine present; and that you take the ash from wine, and put it on the water; and mix that well, and make a clister with it within that you swear that the stomach remains stopped.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash-water, then make a clister with water and honey and mix it with three parts of senna; and make a clister with wine and honey mixed, since honey has the property to purify and wash, and wine adheres to the stomach, and especially when there is an excess of constipation and dryness.
And when you have made water a few times and are satisfied that the stomach has been restored, then make a clister with water in which the flesh adheres to it.
And that you take a remedy of daphnicum and dissolve it in rosin and wine for stipticism; or that you make a clister with some medicines and anoint others that have the properties that I have already described in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the stomach are narrow and cannot receive the clister, then you widen them little by little with a small iron; and place a few folds of cloth coated with Egyptian ointment or basil ointment on it so that it is widened.
And if the orifices are wide, then you stitch together the lips of the opening and leave the quantity in which the clister is added to the stitches.
And if the opening from which the arm branches out is raised above the nipple, then dry that place with a poultice in which the arm is forced to move upwards; for when the arm is constrained at the breast, the flesh becomes engorged.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the stomach completely around the hip, then you should pierce that member so that the arm can move easily according to your desire and your clothing; and so that it is not held back by any cause of the arm.
And if you want that which is on the opening of the stomach remains stopped throughout the day so that it does not leak any water that causes a swelling in the arm. And to know if the water that runs from the arm is little or much, whether it is digested or not digested.
And while you are at it, consider the position of that stomach, whether there is pain in it, and if so, whether it is accompanied by swelling.
And when your medicine has been prolonged in such a way that you see the matter that is adhering to the opening of the stomach already adhered, or if it has become attached, then every third day, and when you remove the cloth, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Consider if the opening of the stomach is large enough to let in a subtil virus; do not despair of the attachment of the flesh, for healing is acquired, because some people heal quickly and others slowly.
If the arm is digested after a few days, you will know that the stomach does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the stomach occurs due to prolonged causes, then you should adjust the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance or property, make them dry with daphnicum ointment, when there is an excess of addition of poultice.
And the last to be cured is that you take daphnicum ointment and dissolve it in rosin oil, and put it on with a small brush, and use that one.
And you will soon see the effect of this action, for when there is no arm, use daphnicum ointment, honey when it is thick within that it hardens, and use it; or that you take mirra and aloe, and mix them together, and grind them thoroughly on a plate, and sprinkle them on the cloth and tighten them over the stomach; and sprinkle the honey that you have ground together with the myrrh on the cloth and tighten it.
And sometimes you give them a long-acting aristology of the lilac from heaven (and it is the lilac from heaven) and flour of erba centaurea, and use that simple or prepare it, grind them together, and pass them through a sieve, and sprinkle them on the honey that I have mentioned; and use it.
If the stomach is prolonged and has not been cured with this medicine, you will know that corruption is in its pocket, and if it is in the bones or in other hard members or at the joints; then you cure it with a surgical incision, as is done from above.
Of the Cure of Parathyriditis and the Application of Ointment and Incision on the Toe and its Section.
Parathyriditis is an apothesis that does not allow the nail of the foot of the hand or the foot to fall off; and if it is prolonged and its treatment is not successful, or it is an apothesis from apothema, or it is corrupted, and the finger becomes corroded, and the nail corroded, and the tip of the finger becomes black; then cut off the extremity of that finger, and its color will turn dark.
And when you have made a division of that finger with water as I have said, then cut off all the excess that is rotten from the nail, and cauterize the wound with fire, because cauterization is beneficial in such cases.
If the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and if the additions of the nail are already causing the flesh to separate at the joints, and if it begins to putrefy and to rot, then stop prying the nail off the flesh with force; and cut off that part of the nail that prickles the flesh, and push that away, and place on it a poultice that heals.
If corruption has already set in the bone, then cut off that bone and extract it, for no time is there when the bone is not corrupted.
And if corruption and rotting have set in on the finger, then cut off that finger according to its length, so that you do not lose memory of it; and cure it within that it is healed.
If there is percussion or atricio on the nail, and if that pain is violent, then cut off the finger of the hand with a transverse section through the nail, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is next to the nail; because you will make the finger fall off, causing severe pain, and this leads to a premature birth in the wound. And cure that place with water that soothes pain.
May's dit is adjusted, which is born in the legs of some men, very little meat is present everywhere, and very little flesh is there in the feet or very little in the hands.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of some of them is in the nuts of these words. May' who was born in some of the nuts of this word does not get hurt, and he who is born in the joints is very well grown.
And of those who are born with flesh, the section is light, and it is because you cut that part with a knife.
May' of those who are born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult, and so you should keep away from the incision.
May' in that who is born in the nuts of this word, cover that you cut at the beginning the meat of him with a round incision through the bone, and place it near one of those saws that are convenient to water, and then cure him from inside so that he is healed.
May' consolidation that happens in these things between them is seen or by the birth of the man who is born there, or by the consolidation of plague or by fire, or by similarity, therefore when you dry up that consolidation so that those things return to their natural shape.
Then place between them a thin layer of lead so that they are not consolidated too much, and separate them, or place between them a thin piece of wood so that it is hardened according to what needs to be done.
And in case consolidation happens in some of these things in the palm, then dry up that consolidation according to what needs to be done and form it into the shape of the member.
Of the incision of veins, such are varices.
Veins wrapped around thick, filled with sad fluids that come from the joints of the body, and most of them enter into the legs, and especially in those of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then administer purge of black cholera from time to time with strong vomit, and draw blood from the patient from the basal vein.
May' the cure of them is according to two ways: one is that he be cut and that black blood be drawn from him, and the other way is that the vein be lifted and all be extracted.
The section of him is according to this way: dip the leg at the beginning with a tail that blood comes out from it, which is resolute in the leg, and dry up the vein in one place, or two, or three with an extensive incision, and lift black blood from above the knee at the beginning of the leg at the part where it joins to the thigh with a cloth, and then dry up the vein in one place, or in two, or in three with an extensive incision, and lower black blood from below the knee at the end of the leg at the part where it joins the thigh, and then take out as much as you want and that the patient can tolerate, and which has a medicine effect.
Then bind him up, and order him to abstain from black cholera-inducing foods.
Repeat the cure by phlebotomy when veins are filled and the patient feels ill.
May' the elevation of them is according to this way: if you cut the leg of the patient, and then place him in a bath, dip the leg into water so that it swells and veins are filled; or exercise him strongly through exercise, if a bath is not available, so that the member is scraped.
Then dry up the vein in the right place by incision in the long or in the back of it, or at the bottom of it, or at the top of it, cut off with a knife.
Then open the vein with a blade and squeeze it from all parts until blood appears, and that is how that color changes towards blackness.
And then pour out and from the vein you will get that white thing which is called cord.
Then place there below it a tray so that it rises and is taken away from the vein, and hang that white thing by an ounce of gold.
Then dry up another incision near that incision for three cuts, and then squeeze the vein from above of the vein until it appears.
Then lift that one up and cut it in the back section of it, and then squeeze out that one and lift it up from where it comes out through the second incision, and then take out that one from the section that is on top of it.
Then take out that one from the section that is on top of all or at the bottom of all sections, and it is all extracted; then cut it.
And if you do not obey me in taking it out and lifting it up, then insert a double sharp needle into it and tie it off, or turn the patient over on his back and take it out with your hand to all parts where it is placed. Keep in mind that if it is broken, then cut it difficult to lift that leg and it comes back on the patient by that wound.
And when all of it has come out, then place over the spot of the plague that is submerged in water and oil that is red and not red, and cure that one from inside so that it is healed.
And if the wine is contracted without having tortuosity that is wrapped around the parts, and it is not according to what we have said, then place over those parts where there is no tortuosity of him and the places where he is wrapped up, and then suspend that one with a blade from all parts so that you lift him up completely.
Keep in mind that your incision should not hurt the vein and that wound, because it will be difficult for you to lift that leg; and serve your prudence with it.
Shape of the incision that is dried up:
It should not be acute, because it will hurt the vein; and it is of coarse flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein for its subtlety; let us have such grossness when we have said.
Of the extraction of a leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in flat places when it rains in Arabic lands and dry lands of little moisture and in which there is no grass or shade.
And it is very well generated in other parts of the body, except for the legs.
The gestation of it is from rot that comes out of the vein when there are snakes and worms and snails and vermin generated between the vein and the flesh.
The sign of the arrival of it is from this vein that happens in the leg inflammation with great violence, and then the place is swollen; and then the vein comes out from the part of that swelling as if it were the root of a plant.
And when you see the end of him, then cover that one piece of lead from which his feet hang in two dragons, and do not break that one and leave the lead suspended from the chest.
And when you see that there is some cause for concern outside the body, wrap it in lead and burn it. And if it is prolonged, then cut a piece of lead and wrap it around it; and do not cut that which has been burnt from the outside, for if you cut it, it will contract and penetrate the flesh, causing pus and bad ulcers in the place and a malignant ulcer.
So that it may be treated gently and be taken out little by little, except for the last piece of lead from behind, so that there is no cause for concern in the body.
And from this vein I have extracted in some men who were of the length of five hands and of two fingers, and now it has come to me that I extract one of twenty palms.
And if it is cut in the hour of its medicine, then introduce a needle into the center of the lead and pierce it with a long needle through the body, so that all the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the place for several days with medicines; and then cure it with the treatment of ulcers.
And this vein sometimes has bumps, and mainly when it appears in the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes out from each hole, and is extracted from each hole.
And therefore cure that one as we have said above in the division and at the water that is said above.
Of sections on worms that are generated under the skin and it is called a bovine disease.
This disease is called in some countries bovine disease because the worms are found in the bowels and they are few, but one is born between the rectum and the flesh, and enters the whole body, pushing and breaking down, and showing itself to the outer side of the skin.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of certain humors, so that worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms are generated in the belly.
And it is feared for the maliciousness of it, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and has come to the throat, then suddenly it breaks out into a sore in it and destroys the throat, and where it does not break out, worms are found.
And therefore, when you want to treat it and extract it, then do not do so unless you have walked around it and observed its appearance, and then find out that you strangle it tightly and press it firmly, and then dry it on it and extract it.
And if it is pressing on the flesh and you do not observe it, then pause a cauterizing fire over the place where it is, and the most feared cause is the corruption of it as we have said above.
And if you see that the disease has come to the throat close to the throat, then strangle it tightly with a rope, and then dry it on it, and extract it; and let the patient use medicine for evacuating the bad humors, and keep away from food that generates putrefaction.
Of sections on disease that is not serious.
This disease is called in our country "not serious", and it is a painful disease that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second thing that I recommend to you. A woman with disease was brought to a town, and I discovered her arms, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and it continued to grow larger for an hour, and then smaller, but more quickly than if it had been air, as if it were liquid silver flowing from place to place.
Then she went out of that person's pain in that place and came back to her body, and then he sat there for an hour.
And then it moved into the other arm.
And then I told him that I would turn it around all over the body, as you have seen me do; and he was very amazed by the change of direction of the arm and the speed from one member to another. And I have already seen ahead of that second way, but this time, however, I saw the changes from one member to another. I did not see it with my own eyes as it was in the woman.
And you did not think it was there, but by water because the woman was from a nearby village, where the bodies are cold and the veins are open, and in this way the movement appeared to your eyes.
And it is necessary that it does not appear like this reverse cure in those who are delicious and have soft veins.
And if you want to cure it and the patient feels pain, then do not appear to him as we have said above, then strangle that person and dry it on it, and stop up that opening, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat that person with the treatment of the body and the water that you expel, and with pills made from fermented wine and others that resemble it.
Of extracting the arrow.
Arrows are different according to their spices, and according to the places of the bodies in which they have been shot, because their diversity is that some of them have large tips, and small ones, and concave ones, and flat ones, and that they are solid; and that some of them have three angles, and those to which they have tongues.
And of the nerves of the face when the arrow hits them and pierces the bone, and is extracted from the mouth, which is over the neck, because it happens with violent sudoration, and blushing, and dizziness, and loss of speech, and vomiting of colic, and suddenly the word disappears and is destroyed; and a white moisture resembling pus comes out from that place, and there is a similarity to the secretion of the flesh.
And therefore, if you see those symptoms, then you abstain from treating and extracting the arrow, unless it is outside the body.
But the arrow that hits the heart is so near to the left arm that it is stuck in a hard place, and there is no pain; and suddenly the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood comes out from the plague, and freezes the extremities, and makes a noise, and faints; and if you know that death has taken hold of all.
And the members when the arrow has struck the chest and is coming out from the other side in a frothy plague, and those vessels that are close to the throat open up, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes hard and asks for fresh air.
And if the arrow hits the veal that is on the foot, and the pain then is close to the small toes, and it stops up all the limbs' muscles with great pain and a sigh, and does not move any of its members.
And if he swallows the dart in his stomach, then let him eat no other food until the pain goes away.
And if he swallows the dart and it gets stuck in his stomach, or if there is a rupture of the plague, or hernia that has broken out, then there is no hope for the extraction of the dart.
And if the dart enters the bladder and passes urine outside, causing a rupture outside, then there is a strong pain on the patient's thighs; know that it is deadly.
May the other members also suffer as it is with the face, the neck, the jaw, the shoulders and the back, and the spondylosis of the spine, and the hernia, and the pelvis, and the legs, and similar limbs; are saved according to the major dispositions when the dart does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venenous dart.
And I recommend that you watch out for the nature of these darts, so that you know how to treat them accordingly.
This is the cause, for in a man a dart enters his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him through another opening, cut off his ears, and he was healed, and nothing happened to his eye.
And I extracted another dart from a Jew which had entered his eye at the root of his nose, cut off his eyelids, and the dart was hidden; it was not visible except for a small end sticking to his eyelash. It was a sharp dart of the Turks, with an iron point, such that there are no ears.
And so the Jew remained, and nothing bad happened to his eye.
And I extracted another dart from a Christian which had entered his jaw; it was an Arabic dart, and there were no ears; then I cut off two teeth next to each other, and that was where the dart was hidden; then I extracted it, and he was healed.
And I extracted another dart from a man which had entered his belly; I thought he was going to die of the dart, but after thirty days it did not turn for any reason of its dispositions, so I cut off the dart and it healed him, and nothing bad happened to him.
And I saw another man in whom a dart entered his two legs; it solidified the plague on him, and after three years the dart entered the space between his thighs.
And I saw a woman in whom a dart entered her belly; the plague solidified inside her, and it did not change its dispositions according to nature, and the woman was not going to die because of some natural causes.
And I saw another man in whom a dart entered his face; the plague was solidified and broke out, causing pain here and there, and it looked like these.
And I extracted the dart from the king's princes which had entered his right nostril; it had already fallen off to the right a little, and the whole of the dart was hidden.
And I was called to heal him from within three days.
And then I removed the plague of the dart with a sharp attempt; and then I inquired about it with careful intention, and did not feel it; but then he felt a pain at his right ear, and then I knew that that pain was from the end of the dart.
And I applied ointment to the spot with an astringent and digestive power, confirming it to myself that the spot would stop the spread of the plague, and heal it.
And nothing bad happened in that spot, which was significant because the dart had entered that place; and I continued to apply ointment there for several days and nothing bad happened; but the plague was consolidated at the same time, and it broke out of its cavity by space for five days, until one day he felt pain on his nose, and he told me: "I feel a pain here."
And then I applied to the plague an acute corrosive medicine for several days and then I cut off the top part, and then I inquired about it with careful intention, and I found the end of the dart which was sticking to his nose.
And I applied to the plague by means of that acute medicine for several days and then I saw clearly the end of the dart; and it passed to me at my hands in the space of four months.
And then the plague was amplified, and I had to reach for scissors, and then I removed it with a gentle movement of forceps, according to how those things are done in the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; but then I restored that plague.
And some doctors said that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it; then the plague was consolidated, and he was healed completely, and no bad thing happened to him because of any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some darts, so that you pause here and there, for those things are not understood by me, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those things are not understood by me, as they are not explained in this book.
And the master knows little about it, and here he knows what is present, and there he knows what is absent; and he has a new operation and new instruments to remove foreign causes from the art when they occur.
And I say that darts are not released from the members in which they are stuck, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place in which they are stuck; or by the contrary of the other.
And that dart is released by attraction of the place, or it is a dart proceeding from a meat-like place, and is thrown and released outside.
And if you do not obey the hour when it happens; then be aware that you will have to wait a few days until you can find the meat which is around it, and that is where its attraction lies, and its egress from it.
And apparently if it is stuck in bone and you do not obey the hour when it happens; then leave it for a few days and repeat the process of attraction and movement every day, and then it will be released.
And if you do not obey the hour when it happens over a few days; then be aware that you perforate the course of the dart in that bone from all sides with a sharp tool, until the location is amplified by the dart, and then extract it.
If the arrow has already been shot into the body and if it is causing pain, then you should question whether or not you feel it, and if you do, then draw out that same arrow with more sharp instruments which are suitable for drawing out an arrow from the body.
And if you cannot reach it because of the constriction by the bladder and its length, and there is no bone, nerve or vein there, then you should cut through the flesh until the arrow can be reached easily.
And if it is stuck in the ear which is held by the flesh, then you should cut out the flesh entirely and carefully pull it out; and devise how to get it out if it cannot be taken out due to the ear being broken and twisted.
And when you remove the arrow from any place where it is stuck, then you should use your hand with forceps to completely cut through; and be very careful behind the first cut so that the arrow does not break and so that its removal by you and its extraction are difficult.
And if you cannot reach it with your hand, then leave it for a few days so that the cuts heal; and then try again because when they have healed, it will be easier to remove. If the flow of blood causes you pain, then administer that which we said about cure in the book.
And preserve your virtue of cutting veins or nerves or strings, and administer medicine to you in any way which is possible for the extraction of the arrow; and do so with ease and calmness and patience and caution as well as care and advice.
And let the arrow come out so that the patient is according to the figure according to which the placement of the arrow in it should be according to which it is easier. If this is not possible for you, then administer medicine which is possible for you according to the figures.
If the arrows that are shot from one side are pulled from the other side, or if you have already shot some of them from one side to the other through the skin, cut off the tip of the arrow with sharp scissors and then throw it away; because it is easy to remove lightly.
If it has been stuck in the bone, then you should cut the meat with an instrument according to the opposite direction of the arrows placement in the bone, and extract it in that way.
Otherwise, leave it for a few days, and then try again until it burns.
If the tip of the arrow is in that place, then you should push it out with your hand.
If the tip has fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it into the concave part of the patients foot, and push it out with your hand.
If the arrow is concave, then you should push it out with a sharp instrument inserted into that place, because the arrow will come out easily by doing so.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then cut off all of the flesh where it is stuck, if you can reach it, and then clean that place with water which is suitable for cleaning.
And if the arrow has entered into the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the rib, and is close to your hand so that you feel it with your touch, then cut off that part, and if you are able, remove the arrow, and then if the patient feels pain, clean that place with water which is suitable for cleaning; and then cure that part until it is healed.
The shape of forceps used to shoot arrows:
Hold the ends of the bow with your fingers, and when you pull back the bow, they will make a sharp noise as they cut through the string.
And of those are made special threads, large, small, and thin, according to the size of the arrow and its flexibility, and according to the width of the opening; and according to the constriction of it.
in this way that it is relieved from the arrows placement inside it, and pushed out in this way.
Of bloodletting by veins.
The veins from which the blood is taken for bloodletting are those which are used to take blood, and they are: of which are in the head. The following are the veins which are in the head: two pulsatile veins which are in the ears, called auriculares; two herbs which are in the temples, called temporalibus; and two veins which are in the eyelids of the eyes, called lacrimalibus; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is in the tip of the nose; and two lines which are on the cheekbones, called maxillares; and two veins which are on the lower lip, called labiales inferiores; and two veins which are on the upper lip, called labiales superiores; and these are the veins which are called allic; and two veins which are under the tongue. If there are veins to be taken for bloodletting in the arms, then they are: five. If one of those veins is a cephalica, then it is not suitable for bloodletting; and the people call it the vein of the head, and it is a deep vein, and it is a major vein, and it is composed of a ramification from the basilica, and another ramification from the cephalic; and they name that vein the great vein of the body, and the basilica is called the vessel which is stopped in the chest, and it is named the citil (cital), and those call it the vein of the belly; and it rises from the arm, and is placed on the flexor side, and that is the one which is bled; and the saveola, and it is the vein that goes between the auricular and the little head, and it has two branches.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of those is which runs from the back part of the head of the wild animal; and the second one is called a deep vein, and its location is on the flexor side of the leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is on the back part of the leg; and there are other veins similar to those.
The healing of the veins which are close to the ears is gentle and quick, and it prevents the occurrence of minor headaches and the spread of bad smells from the head.
And the quality of the vein to be taken is according to your eye: it is that it should be cut from the top part of the patient's head, and frayed there with a sharp knife until it bleeds; then tie the patient's head tightly in a scarf, so that those veins do not appear close to the ears; and if you feel the pulse of those two veins with your fingers, then draw them out.
Then take the knife, and it is that which is inserted, and then you should push it into that place where the vein can be seen, and then pull out that same vein within its cavity, until blood comes out; and if there is a need to cut the skin of the foot or leg, then do so until you feel the pulse of the vein. And then raise your hand up to the vein and the cord above the split, and cut off the vein with a sharp scissors. And be the length of the incision twice as much or less than this quantity; and make a cut from the sunken part as far as you wish it to go.
Then tighten the pulleys and allow that part to be raised which needs to be healed.
And what has been said at the beginning of this book about incisions and their cauterization is repeated here.
Of the two veins that supply blood to the foot, one is the ancient and bad one, the other is the true one; also of the eyelids, constant headaches, acute fluid excess flowing into the veins.
And the quality of the blood in those limbs depends on whether you take it by force or not: if the pulse of the limb is felt and shown to be strong, then you know the blood is good as described above; but if the pulse is weak, try to find out why it is weak.
And then you raise the vein above the part with your finger, and insert the bloodletting instrument between the two veins; and raise the vein up to its place; and cut that part also in the two veins as you have done in the other limb; and let the blood flow according to your need.
And then take off the tourniquet from the patient's thigh; and let go of the pulse for an hour; and put the pulleys on it and tighten them with force, and let that part be raised which needs to be healed.
And what has been said at the beginning of this book is repeated here: the reminder of that limb and of those limbs, and their incision, and their cauterization.
And therefore the bloodletting from the vein of the forehead is appropriate for the ancient diseases of the face and for emigrant, rigor, and putrid ulcers.
And the quality of the bloodletting depends on whether you take it by force or not; if the limb is tightened with a tourniquet and the vein appears, then you know the blood is good; but if the pulse cannot be felt, try to find out why. There are two ways for this: either you strangle the patient to prevent the pulse from being felt, or else you cut the vessel that supplies blood to the limb, so that it stops flowing and no pulse can be felt.
Then pause the cut just at the top of the fossori (the vessel) on that vein and strike it with a pen or some other weapon in such a way as to cause bleeding, and let the blood flow according to your need; and then take off the tourniquet from the patient's head, and tighten it with force, so that that part is raised which needs to be healed.
And some vessels are cut with a blade for bloodletting, however, the bloodletting is not done from the extreme parts as it is done from the other limbs; on the contrary, it is done from the side which is closest and most easily reached; and that part is bloodletting according to the transverse direction, because the bone is close and strong, so the vessel would be cut if bloodletting was done longitudinally.
Of the two veins that run along the eyelids of the eyes, one runs from the eye to the nose, and the other runs from the eye to the ear; they are used for bloodletting from the eyes, and they are good for the ancient diseases of the face.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that you take it by force with a tourniquet on the limb; and then cut those vessels which are good for bloodletting, and stand over their heads.
And the bloodletting is done in one direction only and a little at a time because in that way there would be no loss of blood; but if the bloodletting is done longitudinally, then the extreme part will break, since it is very strong.
Then let the blood flow according to your need; and place those pulleys on it and tighten them for an hour; and then take off the pulleys from that part.
Of the bloodletting from the nose, one runs to the head in cases of severe fever and sudden headaches; and to the ancient diseases of the face, and especially when they are old-fashioned.
And the quality of the bloodletting from the nose is that you take it by force with a tourniquet; and then put your hand on the left side of the patient's nose and cut the bloodletting instrument in such a way as to cause bleeding, and keep it there; for the vein does not appear here, and the pulse begins to flow soon afterwards.
Finish the bloodletting little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then tighten it with force for an hour, since that part is restored a little by little.
Of the two vessels that run along the side of the body, one runs to the leg and starts to form a leper; and the other is the cause of ancient diseases, irregular movements, and bad corrosive ulcers.
And the quality of the bloodletting from those limbs is that you take it by force with a tourniquet on each leg; and place the doctor over the head of the patient, so that the patient lies on a couch.
Then cut the vein in one direction with a wide blade, little by little; and let the blood flow according to your need or to any quantity that you wish; and then do the same for the other leg.
Then take off the tourniquet from each leg and tighten it with a little bit of force so that the limb is not suffocated; and let it rest in its place because the disease is healed.
Of the bloodletting from the veins that run along the body, one runs to the mouth and is responsible for small pimples and pustules in the mouth, and bad ulcers and cracks; and it causes bad ulcers on the nose and the rest of the face.
And the quality of the bloodletting from those limbs is that you cut the patient' s nose in front of you, and then tighten it with a tourniquet on the right side of the nose; and move the upper lip to the left and look at the two veins which are on each side, one under the lower lip and another on the other side; and observe how black they are; and then cut one of them by means of an incision.
Then if you are in doubt, leave it to me; I will cut the one that is most prominent, and that which shows a pus like substance.
And then make the incision of the two veins on the sides of the lips.
Of the two veins that run along the side of the tongue, one runs to the head and is appropriate for pre-focaciosa diseases that occur in the throat; it is also good for diseases of the uvula, and for those of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting from those limbs is that you take it between your fingers in front of the sun; and then raise the patient' s tongue; and look at the veins on either side; and observe how their color changes to blacker; and so see which one needs to be bloodletting.
Then cut each one; and remember that you should not take it by force with a tourniquet on those limbs, because they are arteries.
And your veins that are bloodletting in the neck are those from which blood runs in all men; and the bloodletting of them is done in two ways, either by means of a blade that cuts with force, or by applying a hot stone; and then cut the vein with a knife, and then see if it bleeds. This is the way to do it.
then bring the leg up again to its original position, and place a bandage around it tightly;
and this type of phlebotomy is of small depth and has a fine end, so it is suitable for phlebotomy of small veins that contain small blood.
may the improvement of phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it removes the blood from the legs that are left with a hole in the groin and from there that goes to the feet and belly.
And let the phlebotomist be careful when performing that phlebotomy, because it leaves an artery behind and if he makes a mistake and pricks during the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery, which will cause blood to flow, so that one should not perform phlebotomy with a sharp instrument.
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then you should let it flow and move to another place, or look for a small vein; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is clear; and dry it out with cautery after phlebotomy.
May you want to perform phlebotomy on the arm, then let's look for the stricture of the arm that touches the place where you know the place of the wrists, and bring it close to your hand; and bring the arm down and dry out the vein with a sharp instrument as mentioned before; and be careful not to cut into the artery.
And when you stretch it with force, inflate the place that you have stretched with your hand; then that inflation is an inflation of the artery and so it bursts.
And if the blood flows during phlebotomy like a child's scream, the blood is thin; then you should know that it is the blood of the artery; and let' stop the bleeding by moving it away from that place for a long time; and if the blood stops flowing, strengthen the arm and leave it.
And keep the patient away from humidity of the foot, and be careful with him and do not harm him for a few days until it is healed.
May if the blood does not stop flowing, and you do not have medicine for it, then cut the artery, because its end is contracted, and the blood stops flowing; or take a piece of a fig, and press it on, and stretch that end with your hand and a powder within another day.
And if the blood has stopped flowing, then it is fine; and if not, then heal that place with water from which the blood is drawn, in order to remember the place of the powder that stops the flow of blood.
And the stopping of the flow of blood is difficult in small places of the foot and due to the contraction of the limb of the arm.
may phlebotomy of the black vein is beneficial that removes the blood from the cerebrum and leaves the body; because it is composed of veins of the head and of the basilic vein, as mentioned before.
And let the phlebotomist be careful in performing phlebotomy of it, because it leaves behind a nerve; and if he pricks during phlebotomy and injures that nerve, it will cause stupor, and its recovery is difficult and it may not heal completely; and this nerve appears with the feeling; and if it is hidden from some people and is thin and does not show itself, then let the phlebotomist stop phlebotomy at that place where he made an incision to drain blood, and avoid injury of the nerve with your hand.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you will cut it in length.
The improvement of phlebotomy of the cerebral vein is that it removes the blood from the head and prevents the hernia of the neck.
And in this way, if you want to perform phlebotomy by puncturing with a sharp instrument or with pressure, because it is the safest of all veins; because it does not leave behind any artery or nerve.
However, it is difficult to stop blood from flowing in some people, when phlebotomy is not performed at first; but this cannot be predicted beforehand.
The first one is that it is done in the conservation of health and with the hope of healing; and to perform phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, during spring, autumn, and at the beginning of winter, when there are signs of congestion.
And it is performed phlebotomy on the third day or as soon as possible after three hours have passed from the previous one.
May phlebotomy that is administered, but when it causes discomfort and necessity, or at noon or at night, always at the same time and continuously.
And that is not phlebotomized before the age of twelve years, and women are not phlebotomized after the age of seventy; those who have already reached the age of sixty are not to be phlebotomized.
And if someone wants to be phlebotomized in any way, let' discuss the budels before phlebotomy with a leon; because in them there may be a retained wound that disturbs the veins, and so they do not draw blood from the main members.
And do not phlebotomize patients who are sick and have a fever or an infection; nor those who drink alcohol excessively, or who are constipated, or who are weak due to fasting or long hours of work, or for any reason that causes loss of blood, or in the body, or animals.
And consider in subtle ways before phlebotomy if the blood is thick, due to diet and drinks; and because of medicine, if that is possible with it.
And enter into the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise for any reason so that the blood becomes thin.
And pause phlebotomy of the foot at the beginning of the day, which is around three o'clock in the afternoon; and this is the time when the blood is thinnest.
And remember that the foot of the patient in this day is to be avoided from any accidents with animals, such as anger, fear, and all other physical accidents, such as work and unnecessary eating and sleeping.
And on the same day, it is to be present in the use of perfumes and odors that are common among men; and of balsams and other things according to the amount of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is softer or that of the patient himself who should be phlebotomized.
And then the patient's arm is extended and rubbed by the phlebotomist twice or three times; and then the limb is tightened with a belt, and wrapped up twice.
Here is the translation of the text:
And then tighten it, so that whoever is to be bled should wipe their armpits together before the veins are inflame and evident to the touch.
And then the bleeder should wet their blade with a little oil especially for this; and place their left hand on that vein where they intend to bleed, leaving the spot where they will perform the bleeding slightly exposed so that the blood flows out a little, and the sound stops when the veins are clamped because those are the ones that cause pain when squeezed with force; and it is discovered by the bleeder; and if the bleeding does not stop, then the bleeder should lift their blade.
And so, for all these reasons, the bleeder must be firm and attentive in all these cases.
And then stop the bleeding, especially if the vein is found in a visible place, otherwise, go to another area a little bit away from that spot or above the knee cap, if the spot is not visible.
And if the spot is inflamed or the patient shudders, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because it will attract more swelling, nor go into the bath.
And then perform the bleeding again if necessary.
And if the vision is small and the pain is subtle, and you fear that the amount you want will not be achieved, then go back to bleeding at that spot again according to the second right angle and adjust a little bit in the vision, and do so with haste before the spot becomes inflamed because this spot is inflamed in many people.
But if that has already become inflamed, then do not perform the bleeding again because there is no excuse for you to do so; and place your hand on any part of the foot, because it refreshes the body. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And apparently administer oil in all the bleeding with which you bleed the veins that should be prohibited from being clamped by the cord of a saint, and make water from tar and sage when paused from one of those on that spot, because the saint softens and twists when it is thick.
And if in the spot of the bleeding there is a large swelling, because visible places occur, and mainly at that spot which does not bleed but that visible place, or in the vision of a vein a little bit, and then you cut, and pause over that spot sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly burned, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
And when water is made from the blood of a saint from that vein in a supplement or from another vein.
And if it remains in that place for a few days any blackness or greenness, there is no water; and if you want to, pause over that spot of olive oil and rosewater dissolved, or of myrrh or calament or something similar to it.
And because visible places occur so that swellings and bumps occur which require bleeding from the basilica.
And so place your hand over that spot, and if it becomes soft and swollen, then tighten the compression on that spot, and then that eminence is evil and bad; and then remember to pause over that spot of water which we have mentioned, because a strong flow will come from the saint's artery.
And then use oil to stiffen it, so that the spot remains hard, and then treat it with other treatment before it is healed.
And when you extract from the saint all the amount of his virtue, and according to the victorious color on the saint above it.
Because if the saint is black, then leave it to run until it is light; and if you make it thick, then leave it to run until it is slim; and if it is hot, then leave it to run until its sharpness diminishes.
And if that is full and strong and has a need for saint's extraction in a visible place, then the bleeding from the vein should be increased and the bleeding performed.
And if that is sweet, then do its opposite, and when you extract it in two visible places, then make the second right angle tight.
And the best thing to be administered in a vein bleeding is that it is cut transversely, not punctured.
And this way of bleeding is saving from saint' flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and saving than bleeding according to its length and depth.
And to which is accustomed to happen faints, then perform the bleeding before it with a little bit of water infused in milk of magnesia or simple oxymel burned; and extract the blood from him in three visible places or four.
And if it is cold and dull, then drink before the bleeding with a little water infused in myrrh oil or in scented honey, and if it is stale, then drink with a little spice-flavored water, and with other aromatic flavors.
And if faints occur due to bleeding, and it is caused by the saint' blood flowing out, then drink water of meat and a little aromatic water; and use spices, and control his feet with that hand.
And use the other causes which we have mentioned in the division of faints for evacuation.
And who wants to try his arms and dissolve his saint according to the second visible place, and the saint' virtue is sweet, which dissolves the saint little by little, then it should be done every day.
But who wants to try his arms, and escape from his saint according to the second night, and his body is strong, then perform the bleeding after seven or nine hours from the first bleeding.
But who wants to throw the saint out of his body in the opposite way from the starting place, then do it on the second or third day.
But that body in which there is already a lot of saint' blood and it is hot and causes fever, then leave the saint' blood in one visible place and increase the vision before faints, more than if you had preserved all the conditions of bleeding; and to put your hand on your opponent's wrist as the saint' heart beats, so that he does not die of faints instead of a saint.
And it is not when you want to try your arm and escape the saint according to the second visible place, because it is already closed the vein opening and it is difficult to extract the blood from the saint, then squeeze under it with force and stretch it a little, because water is too bad.
While you leave it to bleed a second time; or hold water to the sharpness of the bleeding that coagulates the blood from the saint' opening; or place over it tar and sage, and tighten with a little compression so that the saint' blood comes out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation goes away.
And if necessity forces you to evacuate the second time, and there is no excuse for it, then draw blood from that spot or in another vein on another arm.
And the vein called bracelet of the arm is flebotomized in place of the forearm or of the bicep, when not dilated or hidden, since it is composed of those.
And the quality of the bloodletting on him is that the patient puts his hand in water until the vein appears clearly.
Then tighten it lightly with a strap around the limb at half-way length; then draw blood according to the small transverse line, not the longitudinal one.
Then make an opening wide and draw blood from that vein at the base of the thumb, a little bit.
And if the flow of blood stops, then put your hand in water until you achieve your need.
May you be if you are in the days of summer, then you are forgiven for not putting your hand in water, and the time is set aside for the body to rest in water's tail during winter.
And the bloodletting from this vein is more effective than that of any other vein, since there are no pulsating veins or nerves.
And the bloodletting from the right wrist is associated with the health of the person's liver.
And the quality of the bloodletting on him is that you tighten the wrist lightly or your own hand, since you have put it in water's tail, until the vein appears clearly; then draw blood according to the transverse line; and if you cut that vein from one side to another, then do not do so, for it will not be seen.
And preserve your hand from bloodletting, since there are nerves that denude the flesh.
Then put your hand in water' tail again and let the blood run into that vein, since if you do not, the blood will clot at the vein' end, and the flow will stop.
And when you draw blood according to the amount of need, then put your hand over the vein of oil and salt so that it is not hardened completely; and seemingly cover it all with a cloth.
May the improvement of bloodletting from the left wrist is that it is associated with the health of the person' own body.
Then do likewise for him in return.
And the improvement of the vein is good for the health of those who are about to give birth, just as it is good for the mother' health; and for the retention of menstruation, and the health of the breasts and feet, and their similar appearance.
And the quality of the bloodletting on him is that the patient puts his hand in water' tail and draws blood over that spot until it clearly appears; then place your hand over the joint of the wrist; and the location of the vein cut apparent from the palm, and from that branch it goes down to the foot' sole, being ramified into many branches.
And therefore draw blood from a wide limb or the other leg first, since it is better and more effective to cut it early.
And if you draw blood from the sole of the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that run under that spot on the sole of the foot; and stop your bloodletting at the transverse line, as if you were to cut it.
And be careful with the bloodletting.
May you not cause pain to the patient; then put your hand in water' tail and let the blood run into that spot until it is evacuated.
And if the bloodletting is done incorrectly in the first attempt, then repeat it a little bit, since the location is good; and do not fear for it to be harmful, but guard yourself from the nerves as we have said before.
Then do likewise for the other side.
And of the sciatic vein, the location we have described is good at the end of the back.
And the improvement of bloodletting on him is that he has pain in his hips when it is done according to the right method.
And the quality of the bloodletting on him is that the patient goes into a bath of oil, and quickly tightens his belt from the waist with four threads in a long and slender cloth, since it does not appear except by water.
Then when it appears, draw blood according to a circle and do so quickly, since it is better to cut it; or cut it from one side to another, as the location is good.
And it is used for men who are mild and well-behaved; and if you hear blood running, but it does not appear to the touch, then draw blood from a limb, and that which appears on the tip of the finger is good.
And guard yourself from the nerves, and let the blood run according to the amount you want.
Then return the strapping and tighten it at the location of the bloodletting, since gently tightening it is good for healing.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Of wind: either from the ear, or from the nose, or from the mouth.
And of ventilation: either by scraping and extracting blood, or byventilating while scraping.
And this ventilation is done in two ways: either with fire, or without fire.
And the places of ventilation administered by scraping and extracting blood are twelve in number, of which one is located behind the head, and is the last to be cut; another at the back of the neck, just above the jaw; a second on either cheek; two for the ears; one behind the ear, located on the nape of the neck; and two on the shoulders.
And ventilation does not extract blood from small veins in the flesh, nor does it cause harm by scraping it, as is done for bloodletting; nor does it cause harm to a person' health when it is done according to the right method, but it is good for one' health if the ventilation is performed correctly.
May you not cause harm to the patient by ventilation or in any case, and give it at the beginning of the meal and at the end; and do so at your convenience in time.
Then when it is needed in any of those cases, and especially if it is at the third or half-day meal, then order ventilation to be done rather than to wait until the day passes.
And the improvement of ventilation at the nape is that it gives gravity to the head and makes it fall into the throat, but not all blood comes out from the whole body.
And this incision is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
It is not necessary that he uses oil that is used for kneading, or in which there is a cold, because it causes great damage.
And by water do not cover those who use the old ones, and on the heads of those who are injured with frost.
More also that over that is continuing on it is done oblivion; and by water do you command the bellows to pause its hand a little at the wind from the feet, fearing the generation of oblivion.
More also vinegar is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the bazal: and by water confer to cough, and to the contraction of air and to the cutting of the instrument of air, and to sneezing, and to swelling.
And if the vinegar is cooled a little, because if it is paused from below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the vinegar of acetic acid confer to accidental pains in the head and to blindness, and to migration and to fever, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the bazal.
And if you command the bellows not to press its hand for bloodletting so that it does not pierce the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And if the wind is blown from below to the mouth, it confers to drunkenness in the mouth and to corruption of the gums, and to resemblance to the diseases that are in the mouth, and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of another that is in the two lips.
More also the wind that is made on the two spatulas confers to catarrh, which is done by the repletion of quality.
And the wind from the two inner parts of the mouth confers youth by phlebotomy of three veins, since it is of the bazal, fuscal and cephalic vein; because that one attracts all those veins that are clamped together that are in the flesh, and those veins are thinner than the other veins within so that attraction comes to the three veins.
And command the bellows not to process in bloodletting, since the place is naked of flesh, and leave it without nerves and arteries.
And it is a wind that is blown on the legs and confers to hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to ulcers from below.
And if you command the bellows that it is a great wind, and that it is of fine air, since the place does not give a strong section; and strong also its hand in bloodletting for bloodletting.
More also of small legs with great care, since they attract the blood of all the body, and confer to old pains of the lungs and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they cause menstruation, and confer to bothor and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophons, and of a linchpin, and of two nails.
However, it does not weaken all the body and causes syncope in men.
And of the wind of a linchpin, youth is given to youth by the wind of two legs.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that you pause the wind at the beginning to see and pour out through the opening quickly, and do not prolong the position of the winds; let them be put away carefully, and that the humors come to the place by adventitious means. And do not cease repeatedly this water and continue within so that you see the place already reddening and swelling and that the rigor of the blood appears.
And then you bloodletting and repeat the water little by little, and approach carefully to the disposition of the bodies.
Since that man who is of tender meat of pigs can be bloodletting once and no more, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the bellows to increase bloodletting a little bit, and bring the water easily.
And if the blood is thick, then you bloodletting two times, since in the first bloodletting the way of subtleization to the blood and its liquidity is opened. More also in the second to the acquired scrutinization of the gross extraction of the blood.
And if the blood is much feeble, then do not make bloodletting the third time so that you obtain the last.
Finally, when we want to extract little blood or a little bit, it is enough to us a bloodletting.
And if we want to extract one blood, let us do a heavy bloodletting; and if we know that the blood is thick, then you bloodletting heavily.
And the term of bloodletting in which the depth of the gouge is only.
And if that man whose flesh is thick, rough, dark, and the pores are narrow, so that the places of the winds are soft, open, resolute; if it is in summer time, then also with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of wild roses, or oil of chamomile, or of blood, and to those that seem similar. And if it is in wintertime, then let it be oil of hay, or of hyssop, or of sage, and of mustard.
And if the superfluity is thick, green, then let the oil be amaranth oil, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anet, and to their resemblances.
More also if the bellows is of large size, then it is forbidden to use oil, and that in these places of the wind of their advantage, the ventilation should be done with hot water or very cold water, or water of hay, or water of hyssop, and to those resemblances.
And that man whose blood is of a moist nature, wash his winds with vine or water of mirtr and sumach, and to those resemblances.
And that man whose superfluities are thick, wash his winds with wine of the old, or water of sansuc (which is marjoram), or infusion of anet, or of chamomile, and to their resemblances.
And if the ventilation is kept before a bath; waiting that it is administered near the end of the bath for an hour or two, and that it sleeps near the ventilation.
What is necessary so that it is directed before phlebotomy before ventilation.
And consider at the beginning: then if the wind of the bellows or that which will be phlebotomized is coleric and blows on the head and inflammation, then it takes cold drinks, such as milky drinks with ice, and lettuce and radishes, and secanabin, and julep, and to those resemblances.
And put off their meals such as bread, and meats of a small size, and prepared foods with sugar, and to those resemblances.
And that man whose constitution is strong, then he takes in drinking milky syrup or syrup of secanabin of flavors, and sumac, and water not too much; and that it is forbidden to him eating and drinking, and putting off his meals of bread and meat, and of prepared foods with sugar, and to those resemblances.
And if on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy water is more than a meal.
And when it is given to drink certain men a medicine of the lion's heart or of musk, it is muscado, or alcelita before ventilation or surgery or otherwise, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and it is not necessary for them to take that scar.
May the ventilation be that they are stopped on their skin, and over the wound and podagra, and over the navel, in the locations of the joints, and the piercing of the anus, because these members do not suffer from a piercing over themselves.
And it is not desirable for those except that a wound of a member, so when the ventilation is stopped on the skin, and over the wound and podagra, and over the navel, in the locations of the joints; and it uses that one to be dissolved: ventilation frets the member and scars it and increases the pain because it resolves ventilation.
And it is stopped on the throat when it happens in its obscuring or pox, because by virtue of strong attraction it lightens obscuring and removes the pox from its location.
And it appears when stopped on the skin and the navel: ventilation is necessary in those who are imprisoned.
These ventilations are given with juice only; and some are given with fire.
And some are given full of running water in the navel's malady.
And water is that ventilation is filled and full, it is running water alone or water in which herbs are boiled to water.
Form of ventilation administered with fire: its opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the medicine should be half a palm; and it should be in the back of it, in the place where it runs around, most of it, the tray being small according to the amount that enters it a needle.
It is made of a strong root or citron, with large leaves, lion, wolf and mouse, because it does not bring the member to its own position on itself.
And in its middle a transverse pole of oak or iron, where it is stopped with candle by fire.
And this ventilation is much greater than that which we have described; and the less one of those according to the malady's states and the condition of the person who uses it.
And the ventilations of the old and exhausted are other than those of young people and large figures.
And the quality of stopping this ventilation with fire on the member is that it extends the hand to the fire of wood properly before a small candle of wax, and stops it in the middle' location of the ventilation pole, so that the fire is kindled around the patient's body.
And then is stopped on the patient' member, and the tray on which we have talked, until when we have ventilation and do not hold back that tray; and the steam is boiled on that tray, and the ventilation stops it.
And light the fire according to its way, and repeat that if you do not like it.
May ventilation that is administered in the navel' malady of pleurisy, with water, which does not have a transverse pole or tray; and it is not administered except when it is filled with water, and it is stopped on the member alone.
This is its form: And this ventilation is much greater, the better to receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter  .xcvii.
Sanguineous are not administered in the members but in the members where it is not possible to position ventilations, because of their age; and so with the nose and mouth when they seem.
And the quality of using those that if you have found blood is in the pure waters of clean well water.
And they are laid down on their back in two-part water until they become hungry, and do not ruin anything in the navel of those; and it is evacuated from the body at the beginning with bloodletting and ventilation; and they are rubbed on the patient' member before it gets red; and they are stopped over them.
And when they are filled and case.
And if it is possible juice from the location of the ventilation, it is much better.
If not, then wash that place with vinegar and make a solution of water; and it is rubbed and pressed.
And if the patient' body is prolonged, then place the place of blood-suckers and it is water; a cloth soaked in water, and stop it over that until it is drained.
And if the pain is multiplied, then sprinkle over it vitriol triturated, or cook and seem to be of stinging causes, until the pain is gone; or they are stopped over the location of beans cooked, and they are laid down until the beans stick to the location, and the pain is gone.
And when it is necessary, a repetition of blood-suckers, when it is possible to change those.
And if blood-suckers are prohibited by suspension, then rub the location with fresh blood or stick a needle in the locations until it stings pain; and they are stopped, because those when they feel any pain soon enough.
And when you want to make them fall, sprinkle over those a little of aloe tritated, or salt, or ash, and sometimes soon enough.
Thus begins the third part of the process: restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of a fracture and an accidental dislocation of bones.
Or son the medical students and the vulgar ones and those who never read the books of the ancients, nor read a word from them.
Therefore, for this reason the way of the sciences in our land is privated; and I have not forgotten it at all, but out of a long study of the books of the ancients and over understanding them, until I drew science from those.
And then I was occupied with experiments and studies for most of my life.
I have already described all this in this chapter that describes my science and upon which I base my experiments; for it is fit that what is added to the description of experiments be made known after the addition of declaration; so as it is shown at the end of declaration; and it is formed out of the instruments that are administered with it, when it is added to description.
Chapter first.
First the great collection of broken bones, for out of these we will begin to remark the members that are fractured and various if one alone is not enough. And then I will state the conclusion of this chapter, which I have put at the beginning of my speech, and it is forced on me to speak about the truth of those; or they are yours who know or learn this noble art better than you.
And therefore I say that when you happen to a broken bone or dislocation or twist or housing, then you must be aware at the beginning with bloodletting and cleaning that place; or any part of it, if you do not forbid anything, as if it were cured by virtue, or if it is that very thing which has happened; or if it is in old age, or if it is hot weather, or if it is a time of heat.
And let him be content in his own food of herbs, and of flesh of geese and of crab-apples; and let us prohibit the eating of coarse meats and of all food that fills the veins with blood, unless you are certain that there is no danger of apoplexy, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter into the member.
Then return the patient to his first position with care.
And so, when the broken bone has begun to heal, let the patient be fed on nutritious food, rich in meat and fat and heavy with moisture, for as such are the foods made from wheat, cooked with water, and roots, and peas, and vegetables, and fish, and chicken, and milk, and beef, and pork, and lard, and oil, and these are the foods that produce a slow and gentle coagulation of the fracture, little by little and gradually.
And know that broken bones in young men and in old men, it is not possible for them to continue and be solidified according to their nature by the drying out of the members of them.
However, nature adjusts and aligns itself to the broken bone from the very beginning; it is a substance that adheres and strengthens that which is within it, combining it with itself, until it comes to a stop at its end of strength and firmness, as well as fire in the beginning, so that for no reason does she prevent this from happening to her works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's food, food in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the spinal bone is different from the fracture of the head bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is diverse from the fracture of the leg bone; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I will remember all the species of fracture, separated out in its own chapter distinct from the others.
A variety of fracture within itself. And the species of fracture of the bone within itself are diverse; for an arc-shaped fracture occurs in its stars, and some are broken according to the length of the bone: and such are the fractures of the skull and the cheeks and the addictions, either proceeding or not proceeding, as when it is prepared to write, and a fracture occurs with pain and disruption in the head, and a small crack-like fracture.
And all species are engendered or tormented of themselves in their restoration, according to that which will come; remember them separately in their places.
A symbol of fracture of the bone. And through this is known the fracture of the bone: it is a twist of it, and from that eminence and appearance of it to the feeling, and not from it when you hold it to your hand.
And therefore, when it is not in the apparent twist and does not cause pain with movement of the patient, who does not feel great pain when you touch the bone with agitation, then there is no fracture here.
While it is possible that it is a twist or a small crack, otherwise you would not know that he holds it to your hand and compresses it with all of his strength; then pause over it of the medicines of which you remember a moment when they come to this place, and tightly bind it.
And know that the place when it is arched and does not split in two or another action that occurs in its skull, as it is raised from all of its side, then you begin to correct it after an hour, so that to it an apoplexy cauterization occurs.
And if to it an apoplexy cauterization occurs, then leave it for a few days until the apoplexy ceases; and tightly wrap that second one, no matter what way you can do so with levitation and invention.
And know that the restoration of it and the reduction of it is less serious than that of the bone in which such a skull occurs.
Then strengthen that second one when you remember it.
However, if there are two skull fractures, then it is necessary to amputate this broken member of two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or to your hand if the member is small; or to two cords or to one cord and your hand.
And be your position to which you pause the member from its ends according to its natural figure, while the breaks of the broken member are extended, then know that you must cut off those additions in order to make them join together again, no matter what way you can do so in their places.
And take care so that no action of yours or injury occurs to the patient through your operation or healing; and, according to your might, apply a bone to another as you see fit.
Then, at that time, take advantage of your strength to touch it to your hand, and if there is any other reason, correct it and wrap it up in the quantity of your virtue.
And it causes violent extension and compression, as well as foolish actions that cause an apoplexy cauterization through their operation, or an apoplexy in the member when they have seen water through the operation of their foolish actions.
And the quality of the tightness of the member that I recommend is this; so that you know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and their size and the shape of those.
And of those that are small, as the arm and the hand and resembling those, then know that the wrapping is of thin cloth.
However, of those that are large, as the back or the waist, then know that in those be a wrapping on both sides and a hard connection, for the binding tightly connects the large member with all its might by tightening it; not like this one, in which there is no damage.
Then begin, and put your might into it, and pause well on the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the member you want; and tighten your hand around the binding.
Then look well at that one from the beginning with greater might than you have strengthened the place of the fracture, and tighten your hand around the binding. Then increase it slowly with the wrapping of the place of the fracture, and soften the tightness little by little until you take it from that place completely.
Then take another object and wrap that other one over the broken place with wrapping, and then look at the wrappings from the beginning until you leave the fracture completely; and be your operation in the tightness of the wrapping and in softening that which we have said in the first wrapping.
And if it is a twisted fracture, pause between the heels of the lion or drape where the curvature of the fracture is, if there is any curvature; and in no case do so.
And pause over the other object, and let it hang gently from those folds so long as there is no swelling or abscess at that place, and then pause over the water that forms the abscess and which contains the swelling; and leave it for a few days; and then bind it firmly.
And if the bones of the leg are made of cane, and formed properly; or if they are made of bamboo; or of palm branches; and each bone is shaped according to this form and figure:
However, note that the bone that is paused over that fracture should be thicker and further away from each other than the other bones, and according to the length of the bone as regards size and thinness; and bind it with another object according to your first tightness; and let it hang gently according to what I have said about tightness, and this should be your tightness according to the place of the fracture, and how much further it is from the fracture, so much should be its tightness.
And note that the threads should be thinner and softer, and of linen; and if the threads are thick, then such as are used to tie a knot, and this is a great mistake, for if one ties the tightness equally, it will cause pain.
And very fine threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the necessary tightness with them, and there should not be more than a finger's width between each bone.
And if the patient is tied by the extremities of the bones according to my instructions, then pause from those heels of the lion or woolen ribbon until he has no injury there.
Some broken bones are am pain, and an accident occurs in the rope, and I come to mind of that in the Capitol according to its uniqueness.
And you know that a broken limb does not bind firmly to the bone the first day; which is why the limb, if it is large, should not be bound to the bone for three or seven days, according to your caution about the advent of an abscess.
This is the way that the ancient surgeons used; they are placed on a fracture and dislocation and torsion.
A method of binding such as a shower of restoration of fracture, suitable for complex cases and mainly for women and children, because it does not conduct heat nor friction: and this is because you take powder of flour, and that is the mediastinum of the flour which conveys the movement of the mill on the surfaces of the grindstone.
And use that accordingly, but rather take it as it is, but take the yolk of an egg, and pause its spreading thinly or finely; and then use it.
Another way of applying the ointment that repairs fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, fennel, and mirra which is rained from the seed of a wild horse, all from one dragon; of myrrh and aloes from another dragon five; allchil from ten dragons; and all are to be finely ground and mixed with water or the white of an egg if the patient's complexion is scarred; and then use this ointment, for it has a good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and gives strength to many men.
Another way of applying the ointment that repairs fractures and twists: Take myrrh and aloe from one dragon five; of mirra and aloes from another dragon six; of acacia from ten dragons; and all are to be ground with honey or with milk from a wild horse.
All should be sifted in a mortar to make a paste, and then it should be sieved, and mixed with water or egg yolk and administered.
A method of binding joints and separated bones from their places, causing pain and accidents in them and developing cracks and fractures: take wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil, then bind it over the place.
Not in this binding is useful for restoration, to relieve gout and expel pain properly.
Another way to bind and restore broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of poppy, and grind them into a paste.
A method of fresh binding that is administered to restore the fracture of bones and also to relieve gout: take rawhide, chamomile flowers, violet leaves, and flour of erba, all of it; make a paste with water, and then bind it. 1.i. All should be thinned and sifted by the wind, if the limb is not scorched.
But if it is scorched, then take that accordingly with water or with cool water and use it.
Another way of binding that is stronger in this case, when accidence occurs and there is a durious gout, to restore the limb: Take rawhide, mustard, marjoram, viola, chamomile, all of it, sifted; all should be thinned with water according to the quality of the limb and the rest position of the wind.
But if it is not strong in the seven sacred books, which are placed on a broken limb to restore it, except for wax and oil, and nothing else; and let it be tightly bound, neither too thin nor too thick.
But if it is not strong in the seven sacred books, which are placed on a broken limb to restore it, except for water and oil, and not for any other cause; and let it be bound with a little of calamine, as in the case of mirra, ensets, and similar things that we have recommended against those causes that cause exsiccation.
A method of binding that causes injury and pain: take some sheepskin, and cut it with a sharp knife, or cut the hair off a man's beard, and grind it up with rawhide and salt; all should be sifted and sieved, and then made into a paste.
But the quantity according to which binding is tight and loose should be considered: if there is no pain or injury, and the limb has not been broken, then do not bind it for more than two days. And if there is a violent pain or injury or swelling at the place, then do not bind it, but in the hour, remove the binding, and bind that plaster.
And take a drap of linen and marine sponge, and immerse them in warm water, and rub that on the place until there is no pain or injury, and then let it rest for an hour; and then bind it over sheepswool immersed in vinegar and oil, or rosin, and bind it tightly; and if there is any swelling or pain at the place, then pause the binding for a while, and then continue to bind it.
And if there is any slight tightness, then bind that tightly with a small binding, and do not bind it too much according to your first tight fitting, and make it small with respect to that which should be healed.
And if there is a great deal of pain and swelling and injury and swelling, then do not bind that with this binding, but continue to use the paste and tightness until it is healed completely, and you will be relieved from binding and tightness.
And if there is not an incident in that member of any of those things that we have said, then do not release it until three or four or five or seven days; And some are left for twenty days all of this is done according to what we have said, until the fracture adheres, and if it is placed on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
Then adjust it in a more tight position than the first one you made, and fit it with the thickening of the patient's skin, according to how it has been remembered.
But if the place of the fracture is completely dried and worn out more than it covers, then know that nourishment cannot come to it; and therefore dip it in cold water every day throughout all those days that it takes to heal it; and a little less tighten it, and with this operation give nourishment to the member, and it will be healed little by little.
But if the common restaurators of the fracture of the member do not restore it to the beginning, according to what covers, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error according to the operation of them, and great fear, and if it were to be dried up there would grow bigger the old ones in their free places and would become hard with water.
And I have not seen anyone of them make that, so it is reasonable to think that they do not make it.
Chapter on a fracture when it happens at the top of the head.
The species of fractures are chips, and the figures of them are different, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by impact with an arrow or spear, and the impact stops all the bone in its place, which is left alone, so that it does not hurt when it moves, and this type of fracture is called aschal; or the spear cuts a part of the bone, and cuts the flesh and does not go through the cut, then this type of fracture is called absolute lifting.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of a fracture that is crushed or twisted; and its cause is impact with fire or stone on the head, and their similarity.
And this fracture is penetrating so that it moves the skin that covers it, or in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
And there is also a fracture that is made in the bone, in the subtlety of the little hair, and therefore this type of fracture is called a hair fracture.
And it is a fracture that is made by impact or by the impact of a stone, and similar to it, which makes one of its parts enter another, and breaks in the concave place, so that it enters through the grooves made by the edges of an arrow when it impacts them, and it is broken by entering into those grooves.
And most often it is made in the bones of animals that have hair, as cow's or bull's heads do.
And therefore all these species of fractures heal quickly, and they are like those who have separated stitches. And I come to the reminder of all this in its place.
I have learned about all these species of fractures by detection, through investigation and examination of the corrupted flesh that is above them.
And the capillary species is known by the red mark that appears on top of the bone, and it is dried up, and it is covered with skin, since the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures consider at first the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the manifest signs that it means to death, such as vomiting from cholera, extistence, loss of reason, confusion, and the feeling of coldness of those parts and similar signs in the main organs, do not expect to heal them.
And if you see that these are not cureable accidents, then begin the treatment of him.
That is because if it comes to you that the patient is ill at the beginning and it is winter, then know that you should study the treatment of the bone in front of him on the thirteenth day according to all the dispositions.
And if it is in the summer days, then know that you should keep the bone warm in front of him on the seventh day, and have it covered with skin that covers it, and that these accidents happen to it:
And if the fracture has already reached the skin that covers the neck, and it is broken into pieces and twisted, then know that you should cut the broken piece according to how I recommend.
That is because you should cut the head of the patient who has a headache, and discover what bone it is according to its usual way and your ability, and that it is light on the patient's body.
And if it happens to you, then you should stop the bone, and wash it with water that is hot or cold, and let the wound open until it is calm, and be sure not to lose any blood from it; and then begin to treat the bone and remove it.
And do this in either of two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you cut the bone with a straight knife, and this is how it is done: You take another knife that is slightly smaller than the previous one; and this is how it is done.
And then you take a larger knife.
And know that you should have several knives, some of which are slightly larger than others; and some of these are smaller than others, and all are sharp at the ends, and made of iron or steel.
And use them easily in hitting the knife with a hammer so that you do not hurt yourself.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you should pierce it before administrating knives to it, and these are called non-deep knives.
And they are not called that way because those do not stop the end of the bone's head at which it is placed, since the wheel has a round edge or border on top of the bone that leaves the cap of it like a small circle, and this prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is convenient that you take many of these wheels, as many as you need for the thickness of each bone, until it is present in all parts of the head; the end of which being sharp, the quantity in length and brevity should be according to the amount of bone's thickness.
And this is the form of three species of wheels: The quality of piercing in the circuit of a broken bone is that you place the wheel on top of the bone and rotate it with the pins that separate it; and then move the wheel to another location, and stop it at which point there remains the amount of its thickness or environment.
And then you cut it with a knife that is between each part of the bone, and make it smaller so that you can stop on top of it at the end of levitation, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or your hand, or any other cause because you have small tools ready for it, such as tweezers and forceps.
And know that you should keep the knife away from any cause of injury to the bone's ends.
And so, with the aid of air, the bones are penetrated; and if it should continue, then separate it from the cyphac, and extract that which is in the bone, for it is roughened and ingrained there, yet more so than other chisels, for it is thicker and more subtle.
And if any of the small bones are broken and shattered, then use that which is easier with chisels; and then heal the fracture with lime and smear those which we have described.
And another way of operation is slight, far from fear, which cuts Gwalia and the lauzec through great noise; and this is what it says: It is necessary that you begin to uncover the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most violent and most visible, until when you have uncovered that part and have paused for a moment the extremities of this chisel, which is slow and gentle, then this is its form:
And it is because the rounded part is sharp and does not cut into anything, and the pointed part is on both sides before its length, sometimes thus: that the rounded part be fitted to the cyphac with the face of it cutting into the bone sharply in a pointed fashion.
And then strike with a small mallet against the chisel of one part as long as it cuts all of the bone easily thus: and you will be sure that no accident happens in it which you fear in any way, and if the medicine is useful for all men and more ignorant of them; certainly, and if it were sleep-inducing.
And if any cause is annexed to the bone of the pannicle in some places of the bone, then cut that with the chisel of the rounded part, and release it easily, for it is released by itself without causing any harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate within the pannicle, and that which is cut or left from the bone is its face, and it has roughness and subtile shards, then, when you have roughened that roughness and removed those subtile shards with sharp subtile chisels, which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer them in all places where they are most convenient and right for them, according to what you find yourself lost in your operation of that broken bone and its shape.
And when you administer in your reason with the chisels which make the bone wider at first, then use that which is most subtle of them, and do not cease to go on according to continuity until you reach the place where you can administer the thickest and most subtile of all.
But in any of the small fractures or hair-like and subtle fractures, then administer care according to what you find yourself lost in its correction.
And this is the reason why it has not been learned on all of those which have studied that art. And he wrote to us here about great fractures.
And if the pannicle is rectangular when you cut the bone, then, when you take a piece of cloth according to the amount of the wound, and dip it in oil and rosin, and place it on the orifice of the wound; and then take another piece of cloth that is doubled or tripled and dip it in oil and rosin, and place it over the first one, and make it slightly tighter than before, so as not to strangle the cyphac; and then administer on it a thin piece of lead, and do not increase its thickness except by the quantity of the wound.
And leave that with this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the healing; and then remove it and administer medicines which are superfluous: such as flour of alum, and powder of herbs and spices, and of similar things.
And this is because you should sprinkle that powder of medicines which is powdered on the wound, when it is dry; and generally, administer on that all medicines of their properties by which they are bitter and not chewed.
And keep in mind according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and is not in the encrustation of ointment or any other; nor do you add virulence to it; for when it is adjusted over the pannicle of the skull, it corrupts it and destroys it, and happens upon the patient evil.
And happens upon the cyphac of the skull, and when it is separated from the bone and its cure is described more clearly, and is darker on its surface; and then consider at that moment if you have described the accidents which we have said, that you know that they are dangerous for all.
And if you do not find the darkness except because of the medicine which is poured over it, and this darkness comes from that medicine by which it is made, then take a piece of honey and a piece of rose oil; and place those over it on the cyphac; and then cure that with the spices of healing which you have within; so that it may be healed.
Chapter III.
Of restoration of the nose when it is broken.
And you should know that the nose is not broken but it is two parts of bone which are separate, or one of those small bones which are surrounded; for so there are two bones in it, because the part of them is cartilage, and is not broken, and you do not find it to be broken; but you find it to be twisted and tortuous and unsightly.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then do not put your small finger in its nose, and do not push that fracture inside by the small bone, and do not pull it out; but return the nose to its natural shape according to its figure. And make that happen for you with ease, and keep in mind that you should not put it before your own eyes while performing this operation on the patient's nose.
And if the fracture is in the upper most part of the nose, and does not touch that which is below it, then make it equal to the end of the bone in which its small thickness is.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make a bridge for that.
And rest for it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and otherwise, then after seven days put a stop to the wound healing.
And put a piece of cloth over the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two small pieces if it is broken into two parts; and make that which is most thick according to how much fills the width of the nose.
And I don't know about these ancient restorative remedies that the horses should be wrapped in wool, and exchanged completely every day; it seems to me that the muscle is wrapped in album from a roasted egg, mixed with powdered flour; and let whoever enters stop until the bone has hardened and the cartilage has hardened.
And some are placed inside the nose, instead of the horse, under wrap from leather of the lion; and it is that already the fracture of the nose has been very violent and that the patient cannot breathe.
This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, make it with water, and if you want, make horses.
And if another wound should be opened, bandage the nose with wax or felt soaked in vinegar and olive oil, or with a dagger.
But if this wound does not open, then return to bandaging that area with flour of sesam and powdered egg white mixed with roasted egg albumen; and place it over the lion's paw, and do not bandage the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose have been broken or fractured, then return to them and remove them with instruments suitable for them; and then cut the wound, and cure that with water that heals and hardens, and bandage it as you should.
And if there is an infection inside the nose, then return to bandaging that area with water and apply cauldron (plumber's lead) to stop the infection completely.
Chapter 2.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not caused by an infection, consider whether it is only separated slightly and not broken in two parts, and whether it has curved towards the inside, then its understanding is minimal.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you must introduce your little finger from the left hand into the mouth of the patient; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left side, then return your little finger to the right hand; and force the fracture towards the outside with ease from the separated part of the bone, with equal effort from the separated part of the bone; and place it correctly.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, then return to extending those two parts according to their right position, as long as it is possible to restore them to their original alignment.
And if there is a concussion of the teeth with a disturbance, then strengthen those on which you hope that they will remain, with wire of gold, silver, or cedar; and place it over the broken jaw with wax, and over a double cloth, and place it carefully so as not to break it, or a single string along its length; and let it lie there according to how you have tied it, and apply that correctly, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and provide them with a mild diet of chicken soup.
And if you suspect that the shape has been changed in any way, then return to bandaging and leave it for three days; and correct what has already been distorted with flour of chickpea, albumen of roasted egg, or flour of sesame, because you will have removed the wax from it, and place it over the leather of the lion.
And afterwards, when it is stable and the shape has not changed, leave it there, that is not removed until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for these fractures take three weeks to heal completely.
And if another wound should be opened, then provide water for him that has the seed of the wind in it until it is healed, and leave that wound open.
And if the fracture is caused by an infection, then consider whether it is a bone separated or fractured, then you should provide water for him that heals and hardens with that infection, and bandage those separated parts.
And if the hole of the infection is narrow, then you should increase it with a needle according to the quantity of your need.
And then when you have removed those separated parts, and they do not remain attached, then cut the hole of the infection if it is wide; and otherwise, place it over one of the bandages that you provide water for healing it, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
Of the restoration of the palate when it is broken.
The palate is broken at its tip, which is connected to the jaw; and this fracture can occur in three ways.
It is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not cause a fracture of the jaw; but it is difficult to restore it; or if it occurs in the palate, which is difficult to restore it; or if it occurs in the jaw itself, which is difficult to restore it.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is caused by an infection, is that you should have two assistants; one to hold the patient and another to extend the palate at its separated part.
And then return that fracture with a little finger while it is bent in the right position; and do not place it at a high point or a hollow.
And if you are thirsty for water, then return to bandaging the patient with a cloth or wool, and make it large according to your need; and extend and raise the palate and curve it towards the outside as you place it, so that it is bent in the right position.
And if you cannot put the end of the palate towards the outside with a pointed object because it reaches the front of the neck, then return to bandaging the patient on his neck, and place one point of the palette on it.
And the assistant presses the muscle of the patient towards the separated part so that the end of the palate is raised up to the front of the neck; and then you correct the fracture and return to bend it with a little finger.
But if you feel pain in the palate and it increases, then return to bandaging that area with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you should use a different tool from those that you have provided water for, because you have removed the palate with one of them; and this instrument is a windpipe or a piece of iron, and its form is as follows:
And it resembles an axe or a piece of iron whose shape is as follows: and its size should be according to the water you need for him; and according to the size of the bone or the thinness of the palate.
But the length of it should be according to what you can achieve during the operation; and there should be two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
And if the infection that you have cut out of the bone is wide, and you are certain that it will not open again, then return to bandaging those two lips with a stitch.
And if the disruption is small, or you are afraid of an opening, then you should use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound.
And if this wound opens again, return to bandaging it with vinegar and olive oil, and place it over that area.
And do not make the star of the broken bones too loose; and so, that you see the patient every day, when the ligament is softened or the star has already been loosened, then you adjust it and tighten the ligature.
Then place the patient's sleep on his neck, and let them rest there in the morning a small cushion; so that he may be raised, his assistant being attached to his collar, and thus the fracture of the furcula is raised with respect to the muscle; or, namely, his arms tied to his neck.
And do not loosen the ligament unless it happens in the place immediately or an apoplexy, within twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see the face of it in water, and adjust it in strictness and restore that one and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
And he is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some seen in certain men is made in the time of that.
Chapter VI.
Of the Restoration of a Shoulder Fracture.
The spatula pie is broken in the place of his lat and not broken from him but the edges.
And when it is broken in the place of his lat - and it is broken in the middle of his lat - and is not known except by touch, then according to that figure of the fracture is sforzato your preparation and reducing that one according to the natural figure in all ways possible so as not to be able.
Then place on the fracture powdered ash of flour and cover it with a double cloth; and place the star of a thin table according to the quantity of the spatula, or little more.
Or if you leave the star is a concave in some of the places of the spatula, then do you fill that concave with ash, and place the star according to equality.
Then tighten it with a long string from the constriction of the tight and the firmness of the star until it is not loosened from its place.
And examine the ligament every day; and all those seen that is softened, another seen and tighten it and equalize the star if it has been loosened from its place.
And strike the patient on his back.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or .25.
And when this number is completed, then do you dissolve the ligament, and that you know assuredly because it is of the bones of which the beginning was not wetted nor its dissolution.
And if you press the place of the bone and leave the ligature, then do you cut it off, and stop it, and make according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadness from an apoplexy without haste.
Chapter VII.
Of the Restoration of a Foot Fracture.
The foot, in some cases, is broken in the middle of his lat and blood in it; but the extremities of him move as ciccadas and comminuted.
And from the accidents of him when it is broken in the middle of his lat is that he declines to the insides and happens to him great pain, and difficulty in walking, and hoarseness, and fortitude, and vomiting blood; and is declared in his cavity in the bone that has been broken and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of him is that he be raised on his back, and placed between the hips of him a cushion; and placed the muscles of him, and adjusted the ribs of him to two sides, subtil in the operation of him and in the equality according to all ways as possible so that it convenes to water, within which he returns the figure of the bone according to what is seen.
Then place the plaster on him and cover it with ash and place the star of a thin table made from straw or caligula and its similar in levitation, because you wrap that one in cloth; and subtil in tying that one to the bone that has been broken is not loosened; and go to the ligature according to roundness on some seen, and tighten it with strictness; and consider the ligature every hour, and when it is softened, tighten that one.
And if necessity causes to the desolation of that one you have corrosion or pruziment, or pain, or apoplexy that it happens in the place, then do you cut and destroy that one and root out the plaster and adjust what has happened by water according to the way of curing him; and reduce the plaster, if times to water the face; and adjust the strictness until he is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of Restoration of the Ribs When They Are Broken.
Know that the fracture of the ribs is made only in large places, which join to two; and from the extremities of them from the division in front does not happen to those, except by water because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of him is not hidden from feeling, but inquiry about him with the dizz.
And the restoration be such that it is united the fracture with the dizz according to all possible way, within which it is swallowed according to what is seen, and place the star of a broken bone with ash and tighten it with the star according to strictness; and consider the ligament every hour, and when it has been loosened, strengthen that one.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the insides, then it happens to the patient a great pain and punctures, so that it happens to him that has wept, and by water because the bone is covered with a membrane; and it happens to him difficulty in washing himself, and hoarseness, and fortitude; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Antips are prepared for that one with a good defense.
And of it is said: Hide that you stop the patient' food that causes inflammation and ventilation, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture may be driven to the insides.
Or let us water it so that it does not cause to generate apoplexy by being hot, if it happens; and if it has already happened, then help to water.
And say of them that it is stopped being ventose and placed so that it sucks strongly; and is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the ventose may throw the superfluities to the place because of weakness.
And say of them that it is covered place with a wool that has already been submerged in oil, and placed pulvil between the ribs until it is filled, which is to be tied up when wrapped that one according to roundness; and consider that it is cured the patient by the cure of pleurisy from food and medicine.
And if it causes a great constriction to the patient which he does not suffer, and the bone is covered with a membrane by puncturing, then they fear above the patient, then hide that one on the place, discover the broken rib, and place there an instrument that keeps the cipher, whose recollection precedes, and that I write the bone according to convenience, and remove that one.
Then place the two lips of the plaque, if it is great, on fire, and cure that one with plaster within which it is healed.
And if apoplexy happens inside, then you cut and place in rosin oil and place on the place, and consider that it is cured by water that hides from apoplexy.
And be raised on his back on which he sleeps, within which it is healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the spine of two and the collar.
Some have a fracture in the bones of the neck, and also to their atlanto, and similar to the vertebrae of the spine. And if water has occurred to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider, for often their muscles are already weakened and stupified and dead and cannot be moved or stretched or tightened, and when you press them with needles or pierce them with a needle, they feel no pain in them; then you will know that it is not healed, and in its disposition it is fatal.
And if they feel a constriction in them when you touch them and pierce them, then you will know that the spine of the bone is saved, and the patient is healed with cure.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck wet, and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
If then you find that they are already weakened, and water has occurred to them, which happens in the most, and when you stand on their two legs, they have a desire for urination and cannot; then you will know that it is fatal, and do not work in the patient's cure.
But if there is no cause of those, the cause is better and lighter.
And the patient' cure is that you pierce into the apex of the swelling, either by a pointed instrument placed on the back or a little hole made with a needle; pause over that for some time; and if it does not heal, then make another small hole.
Then pause one of the pads that is comforting and exists, and tighten it over that with a thread; and order the patient to rest and be quiet, and not sleep on the bed where they are uncomfortable, so that it may heal.
And if there is a separation of the neck of the bone or some other cause that has already been separated from it, then cut off the hair on the neck and tighten it with a knot, and adjust the two lips of the wound, either sewing them if they are large; and if there is some inflammation in the wound, heal it with an ointment.
But if the last bone of the jaw is broken and it is the end of the fracture, then cut off a little hair from the back of the head, and join the bones together as much as possible with wires; and if you have them, place them in a pad, and tighten it; and pause a pad over it, and wrap it up tightly, and if you do not have one, wrap it up tightly.
And if you feel that the jaw is broken in him, then cut off a little hair from his back and tighten it to join them together; and if there is an inflammation in the wound, heal it with a cure that precedes.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the width.
The bones of the width are to be joined together, and if they break, then consider that their fracture is only a communication in their extremities, which are divided in the middle; and the patient feels pain at the place where it breaks, and his back is stupified when it is broken.
And the patient' cure is that you put your hand on him, over the fracture, which is the shape of his body.
And if the fracture is only at the end of him, then you are dressed with a second garment, which is joined to his shape in the middle, and it covers up to the fracture.
But if the fracture is long or has already declined to the split legs, then you are to make the patient lie on his stomach, prepared for your restoration of that fracture. And then when you have joined him, place a pad on it, and then place the cloth over that, and tighten it with a knot; and if you are afraid of any movement or removal of the stelha, do not tighten it so much.
And if you have joined the shape with water that fills it, place a pad on it, so that the patient's shape is not tight, and order the patient to sleep on his two legs or open his side.
But if there is swelling in him, then you stop his extension and cure in the middle of it, and place a pad on it that is to be heated; and if you want to restore him, do so with thread, and tighten it well; and if you want to heal the swelling, apply an ointment.
And if there is a separation of the bone or they are broken, then you join them together.
Chapter XI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the jaw.
The adductor is that which joins the shoulder to the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, your cure of him is in two ways, the one of which you take a long cloth and wrap it around his body; and the other that you take a short cloth and wrap it around him.
And bind them in two ends of a thread, and hang them from a high place.
And let the patient sit on a chair; and then lift his broken arm over a long cloth, so that it reaches to the top of his shoulder in the middle of which you join it to the body by a curve of the cloth; and if your hand is broken, heal it with an ointment.
And let it hang over some difficult cause, or the patient eat meat in the split legs; and then let them drink soup that is hot, so that the fracture heals according to its shape; and if the fracture turns back, consider that you have done a mistake.
And the other way is that the patient be raised up on a chair, and his hand be suspended by a thread, and if your hand is broken, heal it with water, which is to open the fracture with water; and let each of them hold the sides of his body.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten it with thread on the fracture and with another thread over that, and let each of the two ministers open one of his split legs.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then consider that it be stopped at the middle of the thread on the shoulder; and that the other side be stretched from him.
And if the fracture is near the collar, then consider that it be stopped on the surface of the shoulder; and that the collar itself be joined to the body.
And eat easily and work well, and if you want to join him, consider that it is done according to how it should be; and if you do not apply it correctly, then tighten it well, so that it does not cause swelling.
But if there is swelling in him, then let it be strict for seven days, and place a woolen cloth dipped in wine over the swelling, and oiled with rose oil inside that; and consider that you tighten it well.
And the way to tighten that is that you place a pad on the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around it; and then adjust his arms over the adductor, and place his hand above his shoulder.
And let the cloth be tight on the adductor, and adjust his arm so that it may be in place of a stelha, if you do not forbid water from causing a fracture in the bone.
Then use of sthels.
And that you place over the fracture a sthela that is stronger and harder than the others; and place between each sthela the distance of the finger, and make the length of the sthela according to the fracture in addition to three fingers' width from each end.
And place pressure on the sternum with the bandage that was described at the beginning of this chapter.
It is necessary that your bandage be tighter in the area where the fracture occurred. And when the fracture has healed a little, make the bandage looser.
And when you have positioned the sternum and tightened the bandage as described at the time of restoring the limb to its position, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess, leave the sternum and bandage alone for seven days as described above.
And for three days, consider the limb in all parts so that no pus or swelling occurs; or food is not provided to the limb due to a blockage by the bandage; and then adjust everything according to what has been said.
Perhaps if you are certain that there will be no cause for pus, then do not loosen the bandage until three days or more have passed.
And place the patient's feet on their heels, and their hands over their stomachs.
And place a bowl of wool in front of the assistant, and consider for an hour at night or during the day whether the broken limb is getting softer or not; and if the joint is softening, adjust it according to your abilities.
And provide food for the patient according to the order given before, not making it too soft at first, but thicker later on; and then stop providing food when you see that the food is becoming more solid.
And it is customary for the assistant and the patient's legs to be tight for 10 days, then looser and water administered with the aid of a poultice that will heal them.
And if the fracture is stiff, then do not loosen the bandage and sternum for a month or more.
Chapter 12.
Of Restoring a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones that are called the forks; one is small and is the one that hurts more, and the other is larger and is the one that is placed on the left side from the small one, from the top most part.
The large fork can be broken easily by itself, or both forks together are broken easily.
When the small fork is broken underneath, the repair of it is more difficult, and its healing more prolonged.
And when the large fork is broken on the side where the fracture occurred, the repair of it is difficult, and its healing very slow.
And even worse is when both forks are broken at the same time.
Then, if the broken bone is the small fork underneath, it is suitable to the doctor, in order to restore it, that he pause a little extraction with ease before doing so completely.
Perhaps if the large fork is the one that is broken, then stop and make an extra attempt to extract it with force.
And if both forks are broken together, then do so with greater force.
And then, after having adjusted the arm and made an effort to extract it, place the arm on a cushion, and the hand of the assistant on the arm, higher than their shoulder, and the ear of the patient towards the ceiling, and the foot of the patient on the floor, with its toes bent.
And make a cushion in front of it or below it, so that the patient does not get tired.
Then the minister extends the arm of the patient on its side or bandage, and another minister does so on top.
Then the doctor bends the bone in order to extract it; he then adjusts it according to the best position he can find.
And if the bone is not straight in the fracture, then pierce it with a thread of your choice according to your abilities.
And if the bone is separated by a tendon and does not heal as hoped for the arm's repair, then do it again according to the method described above.
Perhaps if the fracture is old, have read Chapter XI of this unique treatise, and then proceed to the treatment described there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then apply a poultice made of rozmarin and white wax, and make it thick but not too much, and place pressure on it with a bandage that is neither too tight nor too loose; and then replace the poultice and apply a paste made from powdery molybdenum applied with clay mixed with honey, and place pressure on the sternum; and let the bandage be placed over the fracture gently and tightly.
You know that there are two sternums for the arm; it is broken in one or both forks together.
Then place your bandage with pressure on the site of the fracture with great force and vigour, and when it is loosened or tightened further, do so with less force as described at the beginning of this chapter.
The cloth that covers the fracture should be soft and not hard or rough, and the string used to tighten it should be fine and not too thick as described above.
Consider the limb and the bandage for three days. If there is any cause that requires a correction of the limb, and if you feel any pain from it, then do so with cool water as described above to stop the pain.
Then let the limb rest without pressure as described above, and then tighten the bandage again.
And if the bandage is already loosened and the bone has healed and looks like that of another person, then adjust everything according to your abilities.
And consider whether you should prohibit the passage of food to the limb due to a blockage by the bandage, because if you loosen it slightly and then stop providing food for some days, that could be the cause. And then tighten it again.
Perhaps if there is no cause of those described above, then you should not loosen the bandage until about 10 days have passed.
Then hang the assistant by their arms with a rope according to their abilities, and let them sleep on their heels.
You know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 32 days, or very firmly in 28 days, and all of it depends on the patient's constitution and your abilities.
Chapter XIII.
Of Restoring a Fracture of the Wrist and Fingers.
You know that with the fingers of the hand and the wrist fractured together, and you do not see any fractures towards the back.
And when there is a fracture on the back or front of the hand, then do so with the assistant sitting in front of you, and place their hand on an extended cushion.
Then the minister extends the broken bones and bends them to their best position.
Then do not apply poultice or ointment if there is no pus; and then place the sternum over it according to its quantity, and you have wrapped that in a cloth.
Perhaps if the injury is in the center of the hand, then make a bandage that forms a loop and tie it tightly around the injured part; and if there is a sore spot on the back of the hand, then make a stinger with a cloth and apply pressure to it with the assistant' hand. And let the bandage be long.
And let the leather strap be wrapped around the hand so that the cloth is applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what covers it.
If the fracture is outside the palm, then cover what is outside with two leather straps so that the hand is held and straightened; and tighten it so that the skin does not move; and place a third strap around the bottom of the palm, between the thumb and fingers, and bind it tight.
And if there is a fracture in one of the fingers, then if it hurts when it is bent, cover what hurts with leather and tighten it according to what covers it; and place a small strap on the top to prevent the finger from bending, so that the fracture does not move and does not hurt.
And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, then it is covered and tied according to its length; or all are tied together, which is better; or a small strap is placed on top, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your recovery, and bind tightly the disposition of poultice applied and opposite to it - to the hand's operation - that covers when there is any cause of those, according to what covers it when it happens that it hurts.
Chapter XIV.
Of the Restoration of a Fractured Bone in the Thigh.
The thigh bone has two ends, and when it is fractured, it is felt according to what covers it; and the part above and below the fracture is felt differently.
And the restoration of it is made so that the skin is tightened over the fracture; and another strap is placed on top of the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and face down.
Then the minister extends all the leather strap around its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if it is close to the edge of the thigh, then the leather strap is extended from the top to the bottom at the place where it is broken; and the other strap covers the fracture.
And if the fracture is close to the edge, then the leather strap is placed from top to bottom, and the extension is done at the part where it is broken.
Then the doctor joins the bone with both ends together so that it does not move according to its natural shape; and he makes a union with a good joint; then cover it with poultice and tighten it, if there is no injury to the limb. And if there is an injury in it, then you lie down for several days until the poultice has healed, and then return to your treatment.
The tightening of it is done so: cover what hurts with a hard cloth; and fold it two or three times, and make it tight; then wrap the leather around it so that it does not reach the shin bone and the edge of the thigh.
And insert a long and thin strap between the thigh and the leather around it, at the bottom of the thigh; and bring the ends of the strap to the top at the place where the strap is above; then turn it over the leather and the thigh so that it does not reach the skin; and tighten it.
Then place a strap around the thigh in the place where the fracture is; then place a leather strap on top of the bone.
Then fill what is empty between the leather and the thigh with soft cloth, so that it is compacted.
Then begin with a strong and firm tightening of the middle one, with three or four folds; and when you move your hand, the tightening should be looser and softer and moister.
Then extend the ends of the strap to the bottom of the foot; and tighten it so that the leather does not move from its place.
Then leave it alone so that there is no injury to the limb or poultice or swelling; and if any cause of those occurs, then make a careful examination of it, and correct what has happened; and cover what has happened carefully, according to what covers it when it happens.
And if the bone is large enough to cover it, then cover it as you can; and if not, remove it and cure with a poultice so that it heals.
Sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by what is put on top of it; and if it has been adjusted with care, as we have said in the Adjuctor of the Arms.
However, in the restoration of it in such a way is not made any injury to the patient's walking; and if it has been restored alone, then another is applied that joins both limbs together; so that it must walk on foot.
And you should know that the thigh is strengthened in 10 to 12 days or more a little; and all depends on the diversity of the complexions and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Thigh Bone at the Bottom.
You should know that if there is a fracture in the thigh bone at the bottom, it is felt behind; and it is close to the edge of the bone.
And if there is a fracture in it, then it is only a crack or a break in the parts; and this is a poultice or a blister, and all depends on what covers it; and about what covers it.
And the restoration of it is made so that what is broken is joined together in a way that it is not moved, according to what can be done easily and quickly; and it is put back together.
Then place a poultice on top of the round strap, if you feel pain from it; and tighten it with firm pressure onto what covers it.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures; and if there is a poultice on it, then do not move it at all until it has healed completely.
Chapter XVI.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Bone.
You should know that there are two bones of the hip which one is large and thick, and it is called by its name as the thigh bone; and the other is small and thin, and it is called by its name as the pelvis bone.
And there is any fracture in either of the bones of the arms; and it is made so that it is restored as the arm is joined to it, and its operation is one.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the pelvis is broken into many parts.
And if the smaller bone is broken in the middle, then the pelvis is broken at the front.
And if the larger bone is broken, it is broken from above; and this is of those causes that are not familiar to you.
Then administer a good extension and rotation of the limbs according to how they are joined together.
However, if the fracture of the pelvis is small and there are no injuries in it; then the extension should be made slowly and carefully so that it does not hurt; and you will be pleased with your virtue.
And if there is any operation to the arms, and you join their ends together so that all your operations are completed; then you will be pleased with your success; and you will not do harm by bending them from their natural shape; and you will consider those who are bent in half, and those who are bent in one part only; and if they are bent too much, then do not bend them so much.
And wrap each sheet of cloth in two folds according to its length, and place one over the hip bone of one side and the other on the other side, and both should be under the most base part of the foot.
And place the two stakes in three places of the two extremities and at the middle, for with this stretching the spine is prevented from tilting to the right or left, and it is in a good position.
And already administered is a brew of fennel according to the length of the spine; and placed in it is the spine so that it maintains that of movement.
And mostly tell you to pour water on the fracture, and when there is water it is called gout properly.
And consider the spine every day and study it well after examination, and you keep it from swelling or inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then stop doing so to the water that is poured inside until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus bone and of the bones of the foot and of their treatment.
To the talus bone does not happen fracture altogether; but to the bones of the foot happens a few fractures; and to the feet of the horse few happen, and do not happen to them except in the middle parts of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and these bones are raised up above each other, then return the patient to the ground prepared in this way as they lie down.
And place one foot above the water raised by those bones, and crush them, and squeeze them together in order to return them to their places.
And place plaster and bandage over it, and place the abdomen of the foot on a small table whose two ends are raised.
And tighten it by stretching the foot downward, since you have wrapped it in cloth and from other causes from which you suffer.
And after three or four days pass by, then untie the bandage, for you will see the bones crushed or they are dislocated, and the operation in those is done as with cauterization.
But if any of them are dislocated, then restore them, and crush them in this way with an eye and recommend to you in the restoration of the same from the hand. And place the said crunched stake according to its length, and place it slightly on one side; and place the foot on this table that was recommended to you, and tighten it by stretching downward.
But if the water that is crushed of the bones is two or three or more, then you place over each stake of its amount wrapped in a sheet of leather, and tighten the table at the most base part of the foot, and let it stand on one of the ends of the table so that it has good retention.
It is convenient to you that you do not forget that you consider all causes which have been said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and stop doing so to any accident with water that is poured.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the cheekbone of the woman and of the bone of the finger and of the jaw of the man.
When the cheekbone of the woman is crushed, then make her chin fall forward, and incline that to the side of the two a little, and let it be held behind.
And the mother should wrap her cheek with a cloth, and make it fall forward with care; and the woman should be struck on the head, and raise the two cheeks little by little, since all water is gone from in front of the cheekbone as it falls forward and the crushed bone returns to its place.
And place powder on the two cheeks, and when he wants to urinate remove the cloth from him with ease and urine, and return it and return it according to the same way as it was at first; and place it again on the second powder.
Let it be so for seven days or more, since that is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of oil and tighten it over the cheek of him a cannula of cattle; and insert all the bladder into the cheek, and blow into the cannula with strength so that the bladder is inflated inside the cheek, since the fracture returns.
And it should be filled with cloth and kept for a few days according to what we have said, so that it is healed.
And when the finger bone of the man or woman is crushed, then administer in the restoration and cauterization of the water that we have recommended in the bones of the ankle.
And the water that is on the right does not hide these close fractures and those of few happen, mostly it happens to the left in this way as it is used and understood by my book; since that fracture means to you in the main dispositions via right-handedness in the restoration and stricture of him, and therefore understand well.
But in the jaw of the man when it is crushed, take a cloth, and wrap the jaw up, and wrap it, and leave it wrapped for three days or more, so that it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the Restoration of Fracture of Bones When It Is Gout.
It is convenient to you that the fracture happens with gout, and mostly if the bone is large such as it is the rib or the hip bone, or similar to this, then you protect yourself from gout, and frequently wash those parts with water; and if the condition of gout requires it of you, and testifies so with water after washing.
And if the gout is severe, then you should wash yourself in cold water as often as you desire, and sprinkle on him powdered pepper; and if another cause does not occur to you.
And begin to restore the fracture in that measure day, and do not prolong water, unless there is swelling.
But if there is swelling slowly, then you leave the restoration of him until the ninth day, so that the swelling passes, and do not approach it until the third day after three days, since you will cause other accidents to happen.
But if the crushed bone is prominent over the shoulder uncovered, then you should wrap it up tightly and wrap it up tightly with your own skin; and do this slowly at first.
But if the extension is not prepared for him with your own skin and is out of place, then you should wrap it up with your own skin carefully; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight days and its width according to the quantity of gout; and by water is necessary for the doctor that takes three or four according to the amount that you require for the cure of all kinds of fractures in general.
And be round, and be in a few pieces so that it is not doubled by compression on him during the operation.
And be of acute extremity in which margin there is in its extremes; and the water that is on him to great extent, and most of it inside the parts of the split.
This is the way of him:
It is called in Greek "labra volentiaratelare", so it is a few words.
So that the end of him is raised by being kept from the end of the bone that is prominent.
And wrap it in a cloth within which returns the bone, and wrap it up according to an equation.
And thus strain yourself to fit the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is thin, and do not take that instrument for a good grasp, cover that you insert the end of that bone where the instrument has power of it.
May you not be able to reduce the bone from all of that, then cover it with what we have described above, or cut that with one of the sharp instruments we have described, or grind it by some means possible.
And place on the bone those that remain in it roughness and small scrapes.
And when the bone has been reduced and the pain that is intense burning in it goes away, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and at this point bring water for the patient, because you have relieved him of great relief.
When your work of restoring the bone is complete, and then cover it with black styptic poultice, especially if it is summer, and do not put it on any whetstone or other cause that would scratch it, so that it does not cause corruption and decay.
And then administer the medicine at the hour of the complaint of the restoration of the bone, and let the poultice be uncovered so that you can cut it with a sharp knife and use wrappings according to the quantity of the poultice.
And be careful not to strain the poultice with the fracture, for the bad weather can cause the bad medicine, and fire on its own injuries, causing death or corruption or decay, and it will heal. And if the patient's stricture is soft, different from the strictness of other fractures.
And if the poultice is large or it is a bad poultice, and you fear about that accident of death that we have described, and pain in the place, then do not cover it with styptic poultice, but wrap it up in cloth, and put it on it.
And when the poultice has started to be born after one or two days, that it gives birth to a child, then you stop it with the cloth you had placed on it, and then administer water, because our custom is that we treat the poultices with four-part medicine and seeds for them.
And remember that you take off the bandage and consider the poultice each day at nightfall until it is consolidated and firm, and cover it so that the member is prepared in such a way that the decay runs from it to the joints with ease.
if the poultice passes more than a few days and it is not consolidated or separated from the bone, then you know that here are only temporary remedies to cover it up again. Of those temporary remedies that remain and separate from it, those that are not separated and place the member on it, causing pain to pierce yourself in order to cut them off, as you can do so.
If the poultice stinks or smells bad, it is an indication of corruption and decay, then you stop using one of those remedies that we have described above in order to cure it.
And from that one in which you should stay silent and present your complaint: when the wound is large, apply to the member so as to cover it with a cloth, and use the bone of the thigh and of the arm, and do not assume attraction for it, nor extrude it by force because if bad medicine happens, death comes; and let him rest where he can recover, because strong pain comes every 20 days or 30. And then treat the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter 21
Of the cure of a fracture trail.
This complaint of the cure of a fracture trail, and especially if it is near the joints, and it distorts the member's natural operation; and it weakens the member's power.
Then consider if the complaint is recent and administer those medicines that have styptic in them, and bind, and see, and press, and rub, and seeds on it; or take some of them all or part, and tie up those around it tightly with a cloth, and tighten those over it for good contraction.
And let that tightening rest for a few days; and then take it off and repeat it again, until the complaint is relieved; or put a thin plate of lead on it tightly because lead has the property to remove all the inflammation from the limbs.
Or if the complaint has already become severe and strict, it is necessary to cut it off with a sharp knife, and then cut it off from its most prominent part, and insert a small scar or hole into it so that it can be relieved, and cure that one within which is healed.
Chapter 21
Of the restoration of a fracture when it has been restored, and then cover it with a cloth lightly, according to its natural nature.
When a bone fracture has been restored, and then cover it with a cloth lightly, unless: because of many causes of the bandage and of the ligature of it being not done properly; or because of strictness of the bandages too much so that nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member; or because of many useless treatments; or because of excessive movement at the wrong time; or because of a lack of rest for the body and of overcoming it.
And the cure of it is to feed the patient and make his heart tender, so that the pain increases in him, and administer a bath; and insert a thermometer and relief on it.
And then place a cloth on the member, so that the cloth brings the nutrition to it, or continue the treatment of it with warm water, so that nutrition flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22
Of the cure of broken bones that are restored with twists and prohibits their operation from what is covered on them.
When the member has been restored to its nature of twists and bumps on the broken bone and complaint, and it is due to the shape of the member, but also the member does not prohibit its natural operation, then do not receive the word from that one that this member is a new twist.
But there are many bad medicine and restorative methods that have caused it on our land; and this operation is very dangerous and brings great danger to the signet of which is fatal.
But if the claudication and complaint are recent, then they are encrusted with warm water in which there are tender herbs, as well as leaves of mint and raisin of it, and is made with a liquid emollient, as well as with diallium well-cooked; or that it be a mucilage of mint leaves and is applied with a gray of gin or with an oil of caraway, and is plastered on it; or that they are grass figures and are trussed with threads of cologne, and similar to those of the medicines that are called firm consolidations.
And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent light friction that it is most humid, and is administered movement of the member from beginning to end at all times.
Might such a twistedness already be added from behind and so done strongly, and it turns into danger and makes the need for surgery, unless that pus above is removed and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and where excesses of the nodulation of that member are cut out with small incisors, and easily administered to that which is sollicited and studied.
Chapter .xxiii.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is entirely of some of the joints of the limb, by which it is prevented from moving, and the figure of the member is changed, and great pains come to the malady and injuries.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, unless it is immediately reduced, that reduction being delayed, the joint becomes swollen and stiff, and to reduce the dislocation is difficult.
And therefore it is not convenient that it be heated or stretched in the hour of the application, because it gives rise to spasm and pains ledent.
But when it occurs, unless you are prepared for the flebotomy of the limb, and then let the pus be taken away from it; and then the member is dipped in hot water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
And every member is cured with the water in which the memory will come back to its place.
You have already seen and ordered the chapters on dislocation according to which the bone is broken; from the upper part of the body to the lower.
Chapter.xxiiii.
Of treatment of dislocation of the jaw of the patient's lower jaw.
So dislocated the two jaws if not treated; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are removed from their place by little movement, and so softened a little; or they are dislocated completely and completely, until they are softened at the joint of departure, so that saliva does not run from the patient' mouth, and his tongue is wrapped up in its own tongue.
But when the dislocation of it is a little one, then in most cases it returns to itself by itself because of little cause.
But if the dislocation is whole and complete, then it is convenient that reduction be administered to it gently, and not be delayed at all.
And the minister has the head of the patient, and enters into it the food of one of his sides in the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is of that side; or he enters with both sides of his food, if the dislocation is of both parts, and the other sides are outside those which he engages; and he orders the patient to cease his jaws and execute those movements from any part; and he enguals the jaw and fixes it until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and more so if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both is gentle, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, for thus have we said.
And then, when they have returned and are closed, and the mouth of the patient is not softened, then pause on those dusts of cloth with wax, and be made of wax and oil rose; and then be bound with ease with soft threads.
And let the patient sleep on his two sides, and his head be between two pillows, so that he does not lick it to the right or left; and do not pass for force him to eat anything; let his food be a kind of meat, so that when the pains are increased and the jaws are no longer able to move, then let him lick what he wants.
And this is to be administered with ease, and not work on the opening of the mouth of the patient towards eating and drinking and calling, so that the jaw is closed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then sudden fevers and sodas occur, and the abdomen of the patient is very sore, and very much vomits pure bile.
And when you see it, then know that it is a loss; and sudden death occurs to the one on whom it comes within ten days.
Chapter.xxv.
Of reduction of the dislocation of the fork and the end of the muscle.
The fork is not dislocated from its place by its continuity to the feet; and some are dislocated at the edge of it, and this is declared by feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient throws himself on his two sides and widens his arms. Then cut the place with your own hand with a firm grip, for it will return to you.
Then pause on that plaster and dust, and make it strong.
But the end of that which seizes and continues to it is never dislocated in any day; then reduce it and bind it up according to what we have said and according to your own equipment.
Then pause on that plaster, and dust, and tighten it, and order the patient to adhere calmly and to rest until he is healed.
And in this treatment the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter.xxvi.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except according to three ways; and the one is that it is dislocated at the edge of the jaw at the edge of the lower jaw.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the edge of its own muscle, and this one is difficult; and it is not dislocated at the back of the shoulder, nor at the front by the nerves.
And most often it is dislocated and goes out at the edge of the jaw behind, and in those in which the muscles are few, it is gently dislocated; but in those in which the muscles are many, it goes out with difficulty.
And suddenly a great pain occurs in some people by a hit or a blow, and the muscle of it is broken from its breach, and is recognized by water that has already been dislocated.
Then you should not hope for it to return until it has recovered from its pain, and then proceed with its treatment.
And it is very difficult to dislocate it when it is at the edge of the jaw behind; but so you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, for you mistake between them; and you feel the concavity of the muscle at the edge of the jaw, and the touch of the ear of the patient, and cannot reduce his own head to its place, neither can he turn it towards every side.
If it is dislocated, then feel the foot or the leg of the patient, and do not be afraid to touch him; and do not turn your head away from you.
And from this dislocation is done a little reduction when it is cold and the patient is child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of the patient to its edge; and then stops the ties behind the jaw of the patient, and raises the joint with strength to its place, and the minister raises the hand of the patient, and widens it above; and then stops those ties because they return gently.
If however by the water which we have mentioned does not return, and from the beginning of the dislocation, days pass, how much the patient is bathed in cold water and is given broths that soften it and make it less painful, with the same reason as if he had been stung by bees, and fenugrec and melilot are added to the water, and it is administered.
Then the patient is raised on his back and the head is turned so that it looks up, and the doctor raises his hand over the spine, and then lowers the leg with the foot that hurts, and another servant holds the other leg, so that the patient does not move. And another servant should hold the head so as not to move it, for it returns to its place again quickly.
And if you want, reduce it in this way: and that there be presented a man who is taller than the patient, standing on one side of him, and intrudes his hand under the patient's foot and raises it up to the hip at the same time the patient is suspended in the air, and another servant should pull the patient's foot away from the hip. If however the patient is in pain, then he must be raised up and it should be seen that this pain does not come from another cause, because the dislocation quickly returns again.
And it is reduced with another way: and that a long pole be fixed on the ground, round in shape, made of mortier, which is not thick nor thin, and is placed next to the patient; since it is put on the head of the pole there are placed lions' skins, and the patient is standing according to the length of the pole, and another hand is extended from his other side with force, because the joint returns quickly to its place.
And if it is difficult to reduce him in any way that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and that you take a long pole, the length of which is two brasses, and its width four fingers, and its thickness is reduced at the tip according to the shape:
And place on top of the round pole a lion's skin, so that the pole does not slip under the patient' head.
And then the head of the patient is placed on the lion' skin, and the hand or arm is extended over the pole at the other end, and the tip of the pole is held between the assistant's body and the arm.
Then the arm is placed on a step according to its width, and the hand is extended from one side, and the other body part is suspended from the other side, because the joint returns quickly.
And when the instrument is complete according to each way that is possible for you, and then, waiting for a moment, suspend a rope of wool over the patient' shoulder; and then pour a paste made of flour and egg white over the muscle, so that it is rolled up again, and then tighten the rope around the shoulder with a knot; and let the member roll over the paste, and the hand should be tied to the patient's neck, and it should not be moved for seven days.
And since the patient' food is suspended little by little, until the member is comfortable, because it is less painful to the healing process of it.
Then the food should be given in greater quantity every day and exercise made with it; and if it is not softened, then it is healed.
If the joint is dislocated by moisture that happens to it or by some other cause, then three kinds of cauterization should be administered according to what has been said in the chapter about cauterization.
If even then it does not heal and seven days have passed, you should know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have already split or become stretched or softened; and you should also know that the joint will never again be in its place.
From the dislocation of that part which is done, the reduction is made with a sudden movement and with force until it returns.
Then another stricture should be administered to that part, and care should be taken for it to heal.
And if it happens that the healing is slow in the member and the movement of it is delayed, then the patient should bathe in cold water so that the gravity in it is removed and it returns to its natural state quickly.
Chapter 27.
Of Treatment of Dislocated Shoulder.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with great difficulty and seems to return with great difficulty; and it is dislocated at all parts, mainly at the front part towards the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when you see it, because the joint is bent and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
And since you treat the shoulder, reduce the dislocation as quickly as possible so that it comes with a cold sweat; because if it comes with a cold sweat, the reduction is difficult and it does not heal completely; and more so when it is at the back parts, because it is worse than all the other types of dislocation, and more painful, and certain death awaits it.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the patient' hand should be extended with two arms, and the patient' arms should be spread out, and the sides of the body should be placed on the shoulder and let go, and push the joint with the palms of the hands together or with a finger so that it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is at the front part, then return it in this way so that it doubles its hand with its own hand, before touching it with the palm of the hand.
And if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then administer violent stretching and do it strongly.
And that two ministers extend their arms, and hold the patient' arms in such a way that they are not moved again by the stretching.
Then the arms should be rolled up again from all parts, because it is wrapped in a long folded cloth over the patient' hand, or limb.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his own hand, he should grease it with some oil so that it helps in lubrication of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with a sudden movement until it returns.
Then the reduction of it is done when it is placed on a paste in which salt is made and egg white, and it is tightened with a string around it, and the arm is hung from the neck, and left alone for some days.
Then let it heal; and when the joint has healed in its place, then cut the member off from that part.
If you see that the joint is not strong, then repeat the paste and member, and leave it alone for some days until it is healed; and then cut it off.
If it happens that the healing of the joint is slow in its reduction, and the movement of it is difficult, then administer a bath with cold water and gentle friction, and pressure, until it is relieved; or place it on a resting position, so that it does not move; and then bandage it, and leave it alone for some time. E approva osta aquell, et metaquell en banh; et quan suza, lahora tu fregua la junctura am fricaci temperada, et approva itera super aquell' aleliati, s  ronchal de motu, una vegjada, et secunda, et terz a., The corruption has already come about in the water for bathing, so it is limited.
And if you want, pause over that cow's wound wet and scarred with the knife and stretch over it; and make it several cuts, for that is wet and reduce to its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
Of cure for dislocated shoulders, if they are from the joint that is between the arm and the breast.
Malassen of the breast some veils are displaced, and the reduction of dislocation is slight, and the opposite is for other joints, however it is necessary to make a reduction quickly in the hour in which they have been displaced, before the loc is pustular or has occurred pustula on it caut.
And the reduction of dislocation is that you pause the joint of the breast on a table and the minister extends the breast of him, and places the navel or the palm over the vicinity of the joint, and presses it in so that it returns to its location.
However it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been shown on the belly of the breast, then the patient pause the two of his hand on a table as well the extension and the reduction; and if the dislocation is precedent they are the two of the hand, then is the position of the breast' hand intricately on the table, so that the navel of the joint is covered.
And then if he returns soon enough, it is good; and if not, then stretch that with a cloth giving way to the pustula and leave him; and do not repeat it again, because otherwise, he does not suffer nor can it be cured after the reduction has been made.
However the joint is according to its tortuosity; and there is no cause for the patient, but his hand is softened and cannot be stretched by any means; then know that nerves are thin or twisted, and then it is not necessary to stretch them with a sharp instrument at their place and firmly gives them a push there.
Then if the malassen has returned, then pause over it the cloth which we have re-used, and leave it and stretch it by hand for three days; and then untie it and exercise the breast.
But if its motion is slow and occurs in it any gravity, then make him stretch that with a tail of water and some cuts, so that he is relieved.
Chapter 30.
Of cure for dislocation from the shoulder.
Some cuts are dislocated the shoulders at all.
And when any of these shoulders is displaced from the two of the hand or the belly of him, then stretch that and press the displacement of it with a towel in your hand, so that it returns.
Then support the tip of the shoulder, and suspend that above the part to which it has been displaced, and leave that for two days.
Then support that and stretch it in so that he is stretched out by day.
And when he is not sore the next day, then stretch that again according to its narration, and do not cease to untie that during the day and to exercise its motion, and stretch that at night; and make it for several days so that it is stiff.
And do the same for him if it is displaced at the belly of the breast, and stretch that to the part and make the first operation on it, so that he is cured.
And in the same way do for him if it is displaced at any other joint.
Chapter 30.
Of cure for dislocation of the shoulder's spines.
When it occurs to any of the spines of the shoulder or neck joint, and then two more spines are removed from their places, then there is no cure for him, because death is sought by the patient.
And the sign of it is that the patient's ejaculation is involuntary and cannot be retained, and some cuts are made on some members of him or his two legs or two arms, or one is removed from its place, because then it is cut into four parts; or one spine is removed from its place, for with cuts it is cut.
Then that has been cut is now made into pieces behind and is called gelbozitad.
However the cure for him is that you consider if it occurs to him from his youthfulness, because then there is no cure or treatment for it at all.
However in that which is caused by a crash or a blow or an analogy to those, the Ancients have spoken at length about the remedies for it, of which some return with great difficulty; also I have seen and improved on it from another which I will tell you, because of my nearness to the matter, my quickness in explaining it, through which I made him understand and he understood.
And those are not cured except the one which occurs to him at his hand, of which I have re-used again.
And that is that the patient be stretched out on his face over a table higher than his head, and an instrument which does not touch his feet be used in order that it should not be wet.
Then place a strong stick upright on the ground at the edge of the foot next to the table, and another in the air above the head, and place another stick between his feet in the other hand.
Then the minister holds one stick, and does not hold it firmly; and the other minister holds the other one according to its form.
Then wrap about the head of the patient and leave the hair-leap free; and extend the edge of the hair to the stick which is intended for the head, and stretch that; then stretch the other hair with your hand to the other end of the foot, and adjust all the hair; and tie those again in the other stick which is intended for the feet.
Then the minister drops and stretches the hair to the edge of the stick, and does not hold them firmly in that place; but they are tied again into their places with the stick which is intended for the feet, and the hair is not held thus.
Then the navel or belly is placed on the spine according to its strength so that it returns, or is placed on a table, and then it is adjusted on the table so that it returns.
But if it does not return in this form, then take a table whose height or length is in the air of three brases, and cut into the wall where I have said that it is near to the patient a place where the edge of the table comes in. Then pause the tail of the table on the spine and the navel or belly is placed on the other end, and stretch it in so that the spine is cut and it returns to its location.
And if you want, open the tail which is rolled up with the hand; and it is that you stand on the ground and place the head of the patient in the back of two sticks, whose length is a palm, and make it in any stick go across the ground and come back, and place one so that he does not move.
And let one turner hold a round stick on which the thistle is turned, and let it be twisted in both ends of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a loop in which the thistle is formed, and its length is a palm more than that one is twisted; and there are similar loops in the other two sticks.
Then tighten the ties that you have stretched on the patient's feet in the loop in which it is necessary to place the cap of the foot, and the ties that you have stretched on the patient's thighs in the turn that it is necessary to place on their legs.
And then each loop should be turned by a minister with his hand, and the doctor crushes the spine according to what we have said.
And then when the spine has returned, and the place is closed, it is necessary to apply a poultice of dried blood on an album of milk, and then cover it with cotton; and then place it over the poultice of dried blood on a table whose length is six inches or more than that, and its width the quantity which covers the site of the pain, and over the split of the spine so.
Then tie it with a tie that we have said, and use the patient' nutrition of subtle substances before it is healed.
And if there is any imminence in the site at the end of the healing, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cool by means of the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place lead-plaster.
And in some cases there is imminent danger to the latter of the two spines of the back, and it is due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which we have already said you should not touch, for it will make you commit a mistake in this medicine, because it would cause great pain.
Chapter 31.
Of treatment of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not cause anything other than dislocation only, and it does not happen in those places that happen in the other joints due to small movement and curvature.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four ways, because it is dislocated in the insides, or in the outsides, or in the front, or behind.
And most often it is dislocated in the inside parts, and rarely in the front or behind parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it in the inside parts is that when you adjust the back of the patient on its back, it is longer and the heel is closer than from the healing, and the patient cannot bend his head because of the loop; and this site is where the loop comes out with a bang.
And the sign of that in which you have a dislocation is to those parts that are opposite to this accident; because the accidents of it are opposite to that.
And the sign of that in which you have a dislocation is when it expands its own back according to complement, but on the other hand does not bend so much that it hurts him from behind, and if he walks he cannot stand on his feet; and his urine is repressed and his body is aching, and his walking is difficult over the floor.
And the sign of that in which you have a dislocation is when it does not expand the back, and he cannot bend his head behind him because he bends his back; and the back is shorter than that one, and the body is aching, and this site is where the loop comes out.
But the reduction of these spices of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already come out with its own medicine; and it does not happen in this cure of everything; and it is not necessary to make a mistake in this case.
But in that case, where the dislocation is recent and is one of the four kinds of dislocations, then you should turn the joint and extend it in both directions, to the right and to the left, because it returns very easily and does not require any other treatment.
But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a minister very strong and extend the back of the patient from its outside, or to his sides, or with a tie that is tied on the back of it; and another minister should stretch out the hand of the patient above his feet, so that his hands touch his toes; and another minister should tighten the tie on the root of the leg, and another should hold the foot.
And it is extended from him or from the inside to the joint of the rib, or from the back to the split of the hip bone; and the other minister should hold the foot.
And all these extensions are made in one way, so that the patient's body is raised on its back with his feet on the floor and his legs hanging down.
This kind of extension is particularly good for all four kinds of dislocations.
And if the dislocation returns in that water that we have said, it is good; and otherwise, then all kinds of water are necessary for this cure.
In the reduction of itself when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inside parts, then the patient should be placed on its back; and then pause the ties on the root of the leg, and extend the tie in front of the split of the rib to the outside part of the hip bone.
And another minister should hold the arms of the patient, and open the large site of the patient' back and extend it in front by violent extension because that returns to its own place.
And this kind is the most light treatment for which this member is reduced, compared with other spices.
But if it is not done in this way, then the two feet of the patient should be tied together with a strong tie, gently, on both legs and on both heels.
And the length of each should be four fingers, and the back of the patient should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
And the patient' back should be suspended from the top of the pole, and it should be at its maximum; and the length of the patient should be two arms.
And then order a young man who is strong to hold the head of the patient, and he should be suspended from the other side by another young man, and the other young man should bend the neck of the patient with a firm chain because the joint returns quickly to its own place.
But in the self-reduction, when it is dislocated at the outside, then the patient should be placed on its side according to what we have said previously; and the tie should be tightened on the back of the patient specifically, and on its feet.
And two poles should be put down, one under the feet of the patient and the other on top; and three fists should hold the pole to which the patient is tied, so that it does not get wet by water spilling over from the patient' body, because the extension to the outside parts should not be made by pulling the pole.
And then any minister should extend in his side, and the doctor should put his hand on it and adjust the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in front, then serve that the bed be slightly extended, and according to this narrative place over the buttock; and the doctor places his right palm on the patient's lower back, and approaches the other palm, and extends it over the lower part of the leg at the hip joint.
And if the dislocation is at the back of the leg, then do not serve that the patient be extended to his legs, and raise him off the ground; keeping him on a hard surface, so that with a stretch he is separated from the two limbs, as we have said above in the stretching of the foot over two stretches; and it is on its face, and the joints are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And serve that be administered pressure to the joint with a table at the place where it is in pain.
Then, when the reduction is completed in the manner described above - and the sign of the reduction of his leg is not hidden from you, that you extend two legs from the patient, and when you see them separated as much as possible, then know that the second limb has returned - and then you adjust two cushions and place a mattress, and stretch the foot in such a way that the thigh does not hurt; and attach the leg to rest for three days or four.
Then return the limb and the mattress, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those stretches in a vestment, then know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and let the patient go home.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and stretch it again according to your first stretch, and let that leg rest for three days.
Then return it, and cause it to walk slowly on two feet or four, until it is comfortable.
Chapter II.
Of treatment of dislocation of the hip joint.
The hip joint is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated at the front, and at the back, and at the sides more than at the front; and it is not dislocated in front.
And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to place his leg on the cushion; then know that the hip joint is dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you pass under the patient's leg, and then that he extend his leg if he can over it; attach the two thighs to his face, and place his foot between the two thighs on his back; and then serve to attach his hip joint to your palms, and stretch those between the two thighs on his back with strength, and another minister extends his foot until the hip returns to its place.
And the sign of recovery is that his leg should touch the cushion with a light, non-laborious movement.
Then return it and stretch it again against the cushion, and attach those to a piece of cloth for three days or four, then remove them.
And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until he is healed and comfortable.
You may serve to administer strong stretching to the joints in advance of the reduction that we have said above in the treatment of the foot.
Chapter III.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the thigh joint.
The thigh sometimes becomes painful with a little movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the second intention, and the dislocation of it happens either at the back or at the front.
And the sign of dislocation is that he feels his thigh swelling in the direction of the dislocation.
The treatment of movement is that it should be a gentle and easy extension and should be stretched until it hurts, then return it to its place.
In the treatment of him when it is dislocated according to the second intention, serve to make a patient lie on his side, and have one strong and capable minister at his hip joint, and another behind him in his place.
Then come to you with the right hand on the top of the patient' foot, and with the left hand at the bottom of the foot in the place of the ankle.
Then throw the foot to you with the right hand, and stretch it with the left arm for two times, and then support it on the right arm as it extends.
Then serve that he make two stretches according to what we have said.
Then support the foot on the third stretch, and you are at the ankle.
Then if he returns in one or two stretches according to this method, and if the foot is stretched again, then do so, because that one returns.
You may serve to reduce the patient on his back with water that we have recommended, then stretch one leg over two feet on the ground, and support a cushion under it, and wrap a cloth around the patient' foot, so that he does not slip.
Then the minister of the patient places his cushions, and another minister extends his foot against extension from his hip joint or leg that rests on the neck of the foot; then extend that leg against the extension of its own limb, and the cushion under it, so that the knee does not hurt; and the other minister serves to support the patient' foot with a cushion, and the cushion is placed between the legs of the patient.
Then the doctor swallows the dislocation with his hand, and another minister places the cushion between the patient' thighs, because the dislocation returns easily.
Then, when the dislocation returns and is declared to you the health of the reduction, then return to stretching and stretch it with force, and attach the leg to the limb with a strong bond.
Then you must be careful of the nerves that run behind the thigh joint, so that the limb does not hurt when it is stretched.
Then leave that leg for two or three days; and if the limb is softened, then stretch it.
Then return that leg in the third day or in the fourth, and do not allow the patient to walk for ten days. You may serve to walk ahead of that space if it is safe that the dislocation is not over him dissolved and corrupted, and do not take treatment.
And if you serve him in the preparation of his food as we have said above in the treatment and preparation, then do not serve to him until he is healed and strengthened.
Chapter IV.
Of treatment of dislocation of the feet.
Then that which is dislocated should be stretched a little bit before reducing it; and if this is not difficult, do so gradually.
You may serve to make a patient lie on his side or on a table at the place where the dislocation is, and let him walk as if he were going.
Then place the patient on his feet, and pause his foot over that which causes pain, then support it with a foot under him as if he were walking; and let him walk gradually until he is healed, and see that he is not in difficulty in walking.
And place the feet of the patient on a table that takes up all the length of the leg, which has two heads, and tighten it strongly and firmly for three days; then remove it and make him rest from walking for four days, until he is well and his recovery is ensured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the dislocations that are caused by a splint or by a fracture or by some joint disease.
When this happens because of some cause and you engage in the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, then watch out for success or failure.
And do not imagine that because you are skilled in the art, you can be proud and impatient or arrogant; and that you use only mild medicines to ease the pain a little, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but hope for salvation from destruction, relief from suffering, and some hope. Then try very hard to restore it at the beginning of the cause, before the patient develops a gouty attack.
And if the member returns quickly as you wish, then administer the medicine that eases the pain a little and treats the plague by applying cold water to it.
And if the dislocation is a fracture and you find the bones separated, then you should set them in place, and do so on the patient who has had simple gout before, in places where those with gout are commonly found.
And be careful and avoid according to your ability that of the instrument in the pathways of danger as it is preceded by my prediction; for you are better off serving your Lord, and remaining permanently devoted to his glory, and more salutary for his true creatures at the right time. Thus ends the words of Al-Bucaisi, clearly explaining what God wants. Amen.
