O, son, I have completed this book to you, which is the last of medical science, because its end is accomplished by it, and for its explanations, and its declarations, I see that I accomplish that to you from this treatise, which is a beginning of surgery.
For surgery is laid down in our region and in our time totally deprived, except that very much the science of it, and its traces remain; and they do not end except in a few small descriptions in books of the Ancients, which have altered their more and are mistaken and wrong within that they are closed the expressions of it, and is elongated the force of it and art.
And it seems to me that I animate that with an order of this treatise in that second way of expression and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of tools of cauterization and other instruments of the work by addition of the declaration, and by preparation of it, which necessary cause is.
The cause why the good artisan does not master himself in our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that his actor goes before being exercised in the science of anatomy which connects Gualia within that he knows the springs of the limbs and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and has the knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their names, and the structure of them; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and places of their impression.
And therefore says Iopracras that by a name is meant, more in the small work and more in the art of surgery.
But we have said of that in the entrance of this book; for who does not know that I have told him about anatomy, it is not understood that he falls into error by which men may die, so often as I have seen examples thereof, because they are formed in this science and get from that other science and those experiments.
For I saw a doctor who was learned and experienced to have cut an ulcerous sore in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in the neck because they flowed with great blood, so that the woman died among her more.
And I saw another doctor who was learned and experienced to have cut off a great stone from a man which had passed in his state, and the stone was large, and he brought it off him by a thread of the bladder, so that that man died at the third day.
And I have called it away to extract that; and I saw that by the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient under him that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery; and in the same way he fractured him in the crotch; and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, cut off the fracture, on the skin, with dust and needles to strengthen it, and did not leave the skin breathing.
Then he took off the bandage according to his desires, and then he prayed, and then he left it off by some days and commanded that we take off the joint; and so came within that the crotch and the foot hole sore, and came into destruction.
And I was called away to it, and I prepared myself to take off the bandage, and I got quiet and peaceful relief from his pains.
But the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and did not walk because of the corruption in the member until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous sore, and became ulcerated by some days, so that the evil of it spread out to his lord.
For the cause is because the cold cautery is pure of melancholic humors, therefore it seems that it does not cover to him in all ways, but it is a member which you suffer that of all ways it is host.
And therefore, son, it is necessary to you that the operation to the hand be divided into two operations: if it is an operation which is associated with health, and work in which there is danger in most dispositions.
And I have already established this book here in all places of that treatise in which there is an operation in which it is error and fear; for it seems necessary to you that you guard this one and let those go, so that the pages do not prevent your speaking and displease you.
And therefore take your weapons with diligence and with protection of God, and your evils with help and with steadfastness.
And use the best way by the grace of God, so that you obtain health and praiseworthy succession, and leave behind you terrible evils of difficult healing, and retain your weapons from here that you are afraid; for it seems remaining to your glory, and later in the world and after your sanctities.
Gualia has said in some of his instructions: "Do not make bad surgery, so that bad sutures do not go."
And I have divided this book according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter begins with the head, in the forms of instruments and tools of cauterization, and from that which is necessary in the operation.
Begin the division of the second part. The second chapter begins with a comparison between operations on the hand and those on the foot, and in causes and dispositions which you must prevent and avoid.
The final chapter, which is the fifth, is about the extraction of arteries and general surgery; and from that which is necessary that the operation be divided into two parts.
It seems that I say the quality of the springs of cauterization and the knowledge of noxious things, and in what way it is forbidden to cauterize.
Then I say that the speech of the quality of the spring of cauterization and the knowledge of noxious things is long and prolix, and subtle by science, and hidden; and already he has talked of a great many of these wise men, and they disagree with each other, and for me it is enough of a small part of their speeches, in fear of lengthiness.
And therefore I say that cauterization confers on the whole complex of things universally the same quality, except for two complexes, which are complex things of different qualities.
In the complex of tail and dry things there is disagreement; for some say that cauterization is helpful to this, and others say that it is contrary to it, which cauterization is not convenient in a tail and dry disease of quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not suitable that such a disease be cured.
And he who says that the opposite of this is true, that it rejuvenates all maladies of the body and dryness that occurs in the bodies of men, for when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of fire, you find that the bodies of men are parched.
And I tell by the words of him, who has already experienced this several times and discovered it.
But moreover I do not know that this comes about on him who has already been exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by subsequent exercise, and has recognized the diversity of the complexions of men and the causes of those maladies, and the accidents of their own, and the space of time of those.
But in the other complexions, there is no fear on you, and more in the wet and sore diseases, for all doctors have agreed about those, and they are not agreed as to the rejuvenation by cauterization in those.
And know, children, that of the secret of cure by fire cauterization and of the goodness of it, is about fire being simple, the action of which does not reach but to the member that is cauterized, and does not hurt the other member with the medicine applied until there is a small damage.
But the action of the burning medicine reaches to that in the members which makes him bleed, and it is very strong to bring about the member with difficult cure and very strong to hear.
But fire, for its smallness and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, but makes it superfluous; and it is already known to us by experience and by the long service of study on the truth of causes; and by this I am absolved from the length of speech; And if it were not that it is not legible at my free hand in this pause to you secret-keeping with fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and of its expulsion through which are expelled the diseases, in philosophical demonstrative speech, which would serve well in your ears.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause; the best time is in early spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage by time's accident is submerged in the rejuvenation of him who undergoes cauterization; and more so if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer from delay because it is feared that those which come about are worse than small injury caused by fire entering through time.
And thus, in your cases, or children, this is not held but by the common people and foolish doctors; therefore, for that disease which is cured by cauterization, it is convenient to pause at all times, and do so for the consequence.
And the cause is not good in such a way that they guard against it by fire; for cauterization is only a place of medicine which alters the complexions and dries up the moisture which is the cause from which pains come.
But, moreover, cauterization in excess over medicine by the virtue of its usefulness and the worth of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the disease in which it has been given cauterization returns at any hour of time, according to the complexion of the disease and the location of the disease, and the virtue of it; and that which is prepared in his bodies by the addition of the superfluities in them, and that which is received into him by the acquisition in food and semblant things of those causes; but if the disease in which cauterization has been given is a subtle one in a member of few superfluities and moisture, then, when it has been given cauterization for toothache and similar to it, it is possible that, in his body, it does not return that pain, but remains there.
And moreover, common speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a quick speech not suited to him who understands it, for they think that it is no cure which adds benefit by medicine or any other cause; but that cauterization is suited to him.
And the cause is contrary to this; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer the ways of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not benefit, and appropriately at the end of the disease give him cauterization, and add it to that. And from here I will explain why cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
And they say that fire cauterization for gold is better than fire cauterization for iron; and do not say this except for the equality of gold and the smallness of its substance.
And they say that the place of cauterization does not make it break, for when it is absolutely true, for I have seen fire prove and turn away that which does not make it break; but when you give cauterization by fire on gold, it is not known to you, for it is according to the quantity which you wish to make strong because of the roughness of gold, and because it prepares itself to receive; and if you put over it fire, then gold goes into the fire, and the metal-worker uses his hand as he wishes for the occupation of that.
And by this is made cauterization on iron, we must place it with care and correctly to the operation.
And I have ordered this chapter on cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have ordered those of the following chapters within the chapters, so that I answer the question which asks it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on moisture and cold the second accident of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of soda and many types of flux from blood, that flows from the head to the parts of hair and ears; and many types of sleep, and pain of teeth and throat, and generally of all diseases that come by cold; as, if it makes one paralytic, or sickly, and apoplexial, and similar in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that, first of all, you order to the patient who is evacuated by lacative medicine the head in a cap, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the virtue of the medicine, and the age and custom of him; then you give a small amount of it.
And then order him to shave his head, and then place the razor between your two palms on a bench that is levelled; and place his hands over the sides of his skull.
And then pause the razor from your palm placed on the edge of the razor between the side of his nose and his hairline. But, moreover, when the boy says about his place it has come, he marks that place with a trial, and then he gives cauterization by olive oil; for this is the form:
And then place him on that place by trial, in such a way that it sinks little by little, and you turn him around.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see any quantity of hair from the skull, then, as much grain of sand as needed to fill that space, raise your hand; and if it does not go up by fire, but another from it, if it is cold, until it is visible hair from the bone which I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve him on that place and leave him there for three days.
Then place over the cut in border and leave that inside which is destroyed the staircase of fire. And then cure the area with a fourfold bitter medicine so that it is healed.
And also they say that when the plague of Rome opens, so much honey is obtained from it, that it is better and more healing.
And they also say that the joint should be cauterized inside the bone, and that cauterization inside should be had so that some part of the flesh of the bone is scorched.
Then let water be poured which is close to the bone, and then let it be cured.
And others say that the cauterization should reach the back, inside that it presses strongly against the bone, and this is the way of small animal: They estimate that the vapors of the head are exhaled from that location.
And let the opened plague be held for a long time, and then let it be cured inside so that it is hardened.
More to me these two species of cauterization do not seem to me, but in some people according to the way of fear; and leave that, certainly, better is it for salvation, when it is; because the head is a division by solution of continuity of its own as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a fiery nature.
And the first species of cauterization is more saved and better to me; and from that one use I do this work for salvation.
I capitulate second.
Of the head's cauterization.
When in all the head happens chronic and long pain and water is present in the patient for a long time, and it uses fire and knives and plasters and ointments and oils and similar things, and most if it has already been cauterized with another cautery which they tell and do not profit from any of those causes, then consider that since the head of the patient is of a strong creation in its nature; and it is not pleasant or causes much pain, then let that be cauterized with another cautery which leaves that a little. And then cauterize that over the corner of his head with another cautery inside so that the joint is broken. And incise the joint and uncover it from the bone the quantity which we have counted and then cauterize that with a cautery in the back of the head at the location which is called "vase", — and this is the location where the wind is stopped. And he thanks you in such a way, and does not uncover the bone, because by water the head suffers great pain which is different from the pain of all the other head's cauterizations.
And you direct this cauterization in its location, because when the cauterization with which the corners of the head are cauterized is softer than the cauterization with which the back of the head is cauterized, and this is the way of it.
I capitulate third.
Of cauterization of a migraine not ancient.
When it hurts hard in the back of the head, or is swollen pain within the ear, let the head be evacuated by medicines which I have spoken about in the diseases of the head; and if it does not benefit from it, then cauterize it with two methods: or cauterization with burning medicine, or with iron.
More cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a glass of wine, and pour it out and rub the ends of both hands. And then incision on the location of the pain with a needle inside so that it is inside its location, and let the joint be uncovered.
And then press down on it with a strong constriction, and leave it in this state for three hours; and then after that pour wine out, and let the plague be held for two or three days, and then place over the cut in border, inside which it is healing.
And then cure that with cold water so that it is healed.
If you see this, bring some of the burning medicines which I have written in the two treatises about burning medicines.
More cauterization with iron according to this method: burn it so that this is its form:
and it is called a small ring, because the head's shape is like this in its form of a small ring, and in the middle place of it is a small prominence.
And then place over the location of the pain, and return your hand - so that the iron is not taken away from that which is left - and turn the small iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of that which is taken away by the side of the joint is so much that the majority of it, and return your hand so that the artery is not taken away from that which is left, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
And then incision on the cut in salt water and place that over the location, and leave it for three days; and then incision on the cut in border, and then cure that with cold water so that it is healed.
If you see this, cauterize at the end of the knife according to cauterization, and keep yourself from incision of the artery in this migraine not ancient.
I capitulate fourth.
Of cauterization of a not-ancient migraine.
When you cure a migraine with water which I have spoken about in the previous cure, and with water which I have spoken about in the division of diseases, and if it does not benefit from the cure, and sometimes by the disease for which is not sufficient the water which I have spoken about in the first cure with medicine or with fire, then consider that you ignite the cauterization with the knife within so that it whiten, more because it means over the location of the pain with a line of length from which its majority is, or that; and leave your hand for a moment and then press down on it within so that the artery does not escape, and then turn the small iron little by little with speed.
However, it is necessary to you that you guard the continuity of the jaw which is more desired for chewing, and that the tongue does not escape and the nerve which hurts him, and that it does not become spasmatic.
And if it is over the guard and caution of blood flow from the artery which is cut, because in the cutting of it is fear, and more to that one does not know water which goes and does not work; and then let the operation be done.
And he comes with a recollection of the incident of blood flow from the iron according to its method, and in its location of freedom.
And if this disease does not benefit from this cure and does not tolerate the cutting of the patient' head, then let that be cauterized in its middle place of the head which we have counted, and then heal the plague within so that it is healed.
If you see this, administer the cauterization which we have spoken about in the chapter of stretching of the iron with two knives, and it is better cauterization this and more to work.
I capitulate.
Of cauterization of the pains of ears.
When there is pain in the ear which scratches and is cured with wet medicines and with the other cure which I have spoken about in the division of diseases, and if it does not continue the pain, then burn the cauterization, and this is that which has no name, and its form is:
And then place the burning point near the beginning, and turn that which is around all the ear so much that it is turned like a wheel, or in the circle of each seed if the pain is on any side. Alonge the cauterization of the ear, little by little so as not to burn the place by trial.
And if the cauterization of points in the whole ear, and those, then cure the places within so that they are healed.
Chapter. VI.
Of Cauterizing a Wound.
Turtura that is cured and the cauterization is not so much of the spices that come by blood, according to what we have said in the divisions of the malignancies.
Avoid cauterizing the spice that comes by dryness or by spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this species of turtura with the sucking and burrowing and gargling, and you do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize the patient's ear with three cauterizations: the first with a razur, and the second with a small needle, and the third with the union of the two lips.
And pause the little cauterization according to the opposite part of the malignancy, for softening does not happen except in the part that appears healed.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with a razur at the top of the ear's tip and place a little one on the hair of the head, and long-shaped one, whose length is according to the length of the said foot, and pause your hand so that the quantity of the spice of the wound is burned.
And this is the form of the cauterization, and it is special with a razur, the shape of which is before a table. But yet more subtle it is that this little one should go to the places, and when it goes in the place of superfluous grossness, a little.
Then return the place with water that is before procided within so that it is healed.
Chapter. VII.
Of Cauterizing an Old Stroke.
When an old stroke is and you treat it with water that we have said, and do not confer your medicine, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that with four cauterizations: on all the hair of the head; and with a razur at the place of the head, as we have said; and on the chin. And the way of the cauterization is done according to what has been said.
And it is already cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, and more behind; then return to the place that you procided with water.
Chapter. VIII.
Of Cauterizing an Oblvious Wound by Blood.
Then give to the patient in the beginning sucking great and small pills, telling them to swallow.
Then return the head of the patient completely and pause on his chin the unguent that is described in the treatise of the unguents.
Then pause this little while, for this is a way of cauterization. And pour water according to the order that we have already said.
And thus if this is good for you, and not, then do to him three cauterizations in the back part of the head, which are coming down from the top part of the head into the bottom part within the space between the two parts. Then pause between each cauterization the grossness of the said foot, and return to cure the cauterization with water that is procided.
But yet if you add to the patient water that he tolerates, then do the cauterization in the middle place; and if you add more, then cauterize that on both of the two corners.
Then return the place within so that it is healed; and be the cauterization a little according to the shape before given.
Chapter. IX.
Of Cauterizing a Wound and of Softening the Whole Body.
Then treat the head with sucking and water that we have said; then return the head of the patient, and cauterize that in the middle place of the head, and on all of the hair, and on the back part of it, and on the three joints of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of the person that is mentioned and the malignancies are tolerable and this malignancy is great, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the three joints of the other leg, and immediately afterwards cauterize within so as not to burn the flesh of the leg, and take your hand. Then return the place within that is healed, and this be the cauterization a little.
Chapter. X.
Of Cauterizing an Epileptic.
It is not cauterized the epileptic, but this epilepsy is by blood.
Then give to him in the beginning sucking and another cure that we have said when the patient is great and tolerates the experience of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gargling and mastication pills to him in advance water for two days, with good benefit of food.
Then return the head of the patient and cauterize that with a razur in the middle place according to the previous way, and another cauterization in the occiput of him, and on each of his hair. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that with the said cauterizations, in having paralysed and softened the body on the three joints of the neck and the two legs.
Then be the cauterization a little according to what has been said.
But yet if the patient is a child, then pause the cauterization a little according to this way.
Chapter. XI.
Of Cauterizing Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and gross blood, then cauterize that with the said cauterizations when it has been paralysed.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluitat declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist with blood, then give to him water that softens the brain according to what has been said in the division.
Then return the head of the patient and do to him slightly what has been said before according to a circle, and pause that in the middle place of the head.
And the patient be sixty years old, and be held fast by all parts.
Then pause with oil; and it is now suitable for keeping away from sheep. And burn that on the fire by moderate heat, which he suffers when he is between you. Then return that in the middle place of the head of him on a circle, and let it be so that it is chilled.
Then pour water to the patient every week once, with the other regiment of him in order that it is healed; or if you want, cauterize that with small points according to what has been said, and so that it is not too much: this is a special kind of cauterization that softens the brain by equality.
Then pause that in the place between white and gray.
Chapter. XII.
Of Cauterizing Water Descending on a Wound.
When you have said that the beginning of water in the wound is through the veins according to what we have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient water that softens his head, and keep this water from all moisture.
And make that man drink a bath of vinegar for several days.
Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize the place where you shaved his head with a pointed cautery; and cauterize another point on each temple if it is the beginning of water in two holes, or one point if it is the beginning of water in one hole.
Then cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that remain attached to the cord; and let the cauterization be in that length, in the same way as the temples are located.
And guard against flow of blood when you cauterize; and if you see any flow of blood, stop it with some medicine, which is at your disposal.
Then come the wisdom that is in extraction of arteries and in avoidance of those and in caution against flow of blood.
And some veins are cauterized in the neck, leaving two bones with two pointed cauterizations.
Chapter XIII.
Of Cauterization of Ancient Wounds.
When the holes shed ancient tears, steadily and through the veins and arteries that are in the prominent place of the head, if it is verified that there is superabundance of flowing phlegm, then cauterize that man with a pointed cauterization that we have described in the beginning of water flowing into the holes, and cauterize that same point on his forehead, and two points on each temple, and two points on the neck between the two temples, and two points on the neck between the two bones. And if it is necessary to stop a sneeze, then cauterize that man on the whole length of the hole on the edge of the cheek with a small cauterization.
Chapter XIV.
Of Cauterization of a Nasal Odor.
When you treat that man with the medicine we have described in the division and do not benefit from your treatment, then prepare him three times a night to drink the liquids; and then shave his head, and cauterize him with a pointed cauterization, half of it with an olive cauterization. Then cauterize that man with a cloves' cauterization on each temple, leaving the hair on top of the head a little bit.
And guard against the fire that does not burn that part.
This is the form of the cloves' cauterization.
Chapter XV.
Of Cauterization for Softening the Palpes of Holes.
When the eyelid of the hole is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cauterization; and this is the way to do it:
And if you want, then cauterize each temple a little bit with two cauterizations, and let them be elongated from the temples. Let the length of each cauterization be according to the quantity of the eyelid.
And do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adurbed.
Chapter XVI.
Of Cauterization for the Palpes of Holes When the Hair is Changed into the Edge and Turn the Hole Inside Out.
When the hair of the hole is changed into the edge and turns the hole inside out, then cauterize it according to two ways: either by burning or by a burning medicine.
If it is a burning cauterization, then order the patient in front of you that he wash his hair with water, so that the edges are softened, and do not burn them; and if he turns himself to face away from you, then strengthen his holes with a cloth so that they are not burned, and his hair is not cut.
And then, when they are narced and engualled, then place the patient's head in between your legs, and put a cloth on his eyes, so that he cannot see; and let the beginning of the sign be according to the figure of a death's head, and this is the end of the sign near the hair.
Then put on his head a turban of cloth or of yarn, or a wet hair on it.
Then light the cauterization, and this is the form of the cauterization:
Then cauterize on the figure that is outlined, little by little, in a visible way, and burn the surface of the cord, which is then apparently completely burned with a bay leaf.
The sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the hole already contracted and that the hair of the patient has already been raised from the edge by the piercing.
Then lift up your hand and let it rest for three days, and then put on the turban so that it is worn inside out. Then cure that with salve, so that it is healed.
But if it returns because of the hair, causing a loss of the eyelid and softening it, then do another cauterization on that whole part again at first.
But if the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize that within so that it is raised to its natural place and is not hooked into the hole, and that the hair does not stick to the eye.
But the cauterization with burning medicine is this: command the patient that he wash his hair within so that it is softened and not burned, and do not cut it; then make a turban of cloth or yarn, and put on his head.
Then take a scythe and a live cow's tongue. The first is: Add these three together and mix them well, and make a strong solution from it so that it is not weakened; then apply this solution to the scythe and the live cow's tongue, and their form is according to the figure of a death' head; then let it rest on one side of the hole, and put on his head a turban of cloth or yarn, and order him to wash his hair with water so that the edges are softened and not burned.
Then put on the medicine and let it rest a little bit; and do not press hard on your hand with the medicine, for the taste of the medicine is burning in your hand, as it is according to the quantity.
Then, when you feel that the medicine is burning in your hand, then let it rest and then wash your hand with water; and consider if the eyelid has already been raised as it is washed with the tension of a burning or cutting, for it is good; and if not, then return to the place where you put the medicine on the spot that needs to be treated, without letting it burn or cut, so that the hole does not suffer.
Then put on the turban so that it is worn against the border of the cord, which is to be eradicated by the tension of the heat; and then cure that with salve, either dry or with another medicine, so that it is healed.
And you must be vigilant in your operation so that the medicine does not fall onto the hole, and if the eyelid is softened by a cause of hair, then repeat your medicine on that part where the eyelid is softened, and truly start from the beginning, and put on the spot where it needs to be treated with cauterization; and then turn yourself away from facing the patient so that he does not see.
This is the form of Death' s head.
And you know that men' s holes are different according to their size and age, and then according to that hole, your cauterization is made.
And do not hide the way of treatment from that person who studies this art.
Chapter XVII
On Cauterization for a Fistula in the Lacrimal of the Eye
When you treat a fistula that has been said to be in the lacrimal of the eye and do not confer with your treatment, then, as soon as you have cauterized it according to this method: order the patient to hold his head still on the third finger, and have one minister hold his head between the shoulders in such a way that he is neither shaken nor disturbed by the heat.
Then place a hot wax or a poultice of wool on their eye.
And set fire to the cauterization, which this is the form:
that it be round, so that on one end there is a kind of cane or a piece of wire, from which the cauterization is made,
And if it penetrates, let it enter into the other end. And if you want to do so with a probe.
However, that which is round is better for the work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and take away the pus and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then place the cauterization on it which is well lit, and at the same time on the root of the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient's head may be disturbed, and then pause the cauterization on the gray of the eye and corrupt it.
And if at the beginning of the eye's cauterization it enters into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice, as may be necessary, and leave it like that for three days, and then place a hot paste on it around and within it so that it may heal.
But if it is not healed after eleven days, then place an acute corrosive medicine on it so that the bone may be exposed and be scraped according to what you have said in the next chapter.
And another way of cauterizing a fistula, which they first said: go to the site of the fistula and cut it out and place that small crack in its shape: And pour into it a quantity of liquid lead; and your hand over it with good retention, so that the lead does not reach the patient' eye; and then place on the patient' eye hot wax or water, for the lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is healed by the treatment and the cauterization which we have said, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe from the nose and reduce the fistula to its root according to what may be necessary.
Chapter XVIII
On Cauterization of the Broken Nasal Nerve
The appearance of a red or swollen spot indicates a crack or fracture. Most often it appears on the lips, and occasionally on children's lips.
So, when you treat those cracks with the treatment we have said and do not confer with your treatment, then set fire to a small knife according to this form which it encageys:
And its cavity according to the subtility of a knife.
Then place it carefully within those cracks so that the cauterization reaches the root of the cracks.
Then treat it with care so that it may heal.
Chapter XIX
On Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth
When there is a swelling in the raze of the uvula or in the palate or in the razes of the teeth, then an apoplexy occurs and it is broken, and then it is inflamed and a crack forms, and then you treat it and do not confer with your treatment, then, as soon as you have determined the quantity which is received in the fistula, then set fire to the cauterization according to that quantity, and place it on the root of the fistula, and if it reaches the edge of the fire, then let it enter into the fistula, and at the back of it also make a probe, and then treat it with water which we have said to heal it, so that it may be healed.
And if the healing is cut off and is healed, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the site and break the bone according to what may be necessary, which will be said in the next chapter.
Chapter XX
On Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of the Veins
When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then treat them with medicines and do not confer with your treatment, then place the head of the patient on the third finger, and set fire to the cauterization which will come out in this way: therefore, you pause the tongue over the tooth, and insert the tip of the cauterization into that quickly, and place your hand around so that the heat does not reach the patient' jaw; and at the back of the tooth also make a probe.
Then remove your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times according to what you want.
Then hold the patient' mouth open with a cup of salt water and keep it like that for an hour, then pour out the water, because the loose tooth is closed, the softened gum is tightened, and the moisture which has corrupted is dried up.
Chapter XXI
On Cauterization for Toothache
When toothache is caused by cold or worm, and if you do not confer with your treatment using medicine, then treat it on the edge of a knife, or on fire.
Cauterization on the edge is that you take a piece of iron and rub it, then place it in the shape of a V over the painful tooth, and set fire to it quickly, and hold it over the tooth so that it may be heated quickly before it is cooled off.
Then repeat the cauterization several times according to its power so that it may reach the root of the teeth.
And if you see it, rub it on the edge of a knife, and place it over the tooth, and then place over it hot iron so that the iron reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
However, the cauterization on fire is that you hold the tongue or iron in your hand, and let it be at the tip of the knife, and do not allow the sharpness or acuity of the fire to reach the patient' mouth.
Then set fire to the cauterization according to its form, and place it over the tooth, and your hand so that the cauterization may cool down; and make some water ready because the pain may return or continue on the same day.
Then, by the power of that cauterization which the patient holds in his mouth and keeps it for an hour, then pour out [it], and this is the form of the cauterization.
Cauterize on the edge which you can see.
This is the form of the cannula:
Chapter .xxii.
On cauterization for herniated discs.
When herniated discs are made of blood and humors that do not respond to medication, and you notice a slight improvement in digestion, then heat the cauterizing tool into the following shape: having two open ends so that the fire may reach the bottom of the disc, and place one end on the lump, and pause the heat over the lump for a moment, and the other if you wish to do so, until it reaches the disk's pocket.
If the lump is small, then pause the cauterization according to the size of the lump, and leave it for three days and pause the heat on top of it gently until the fire has completely burned it out.
Then clean it thoroughly and dress it with bandages until it heals.
Chapter .xxiii.
On cauterization for a rawiella (a type of worm), and for constricting the air passages:
When moisture comes to the chest, and mostly when it is cold in origin, then first of all, empty the patient' s bowels with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the root of the worm in the place where it is embedded.
And beware that you do not cauterize the worm or burn its tail with the cauterizing tool, except a little bit.
Then cauterize it again with another cauterizing tool at the joint of the spine in the last vertebra. The cauterization of the air passages should be done as described above.
Then clean thoroughly that which has been cauterized, and dress it with ointment until it heals.
Chapter .xxiv.
On cauterization for a chest infection, and for coughing:
When coughing and chest infection are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or a sore throat, but it is an old infection, then cauterize it twice on the rib, in the place where it is embedded; and another cauterizing tool at the middle of the foot between two toes; and do the cauterizing as described above.
And if you wish, your cauterization with a pointed tool, the shape of which you use in the puncturing of pain in the ears, is as follows:
Then make points where needed; and clean thoroughly that which has been cauterized, until it heals.
And this is the third type of cauterization, which has three ramps for cauterization, according to this form:
Chapter  .xxv.
On cauterization of the tickle which is at the tip of the tongue:
When the tip of the tongue is dislocated by lubricous moisture and does not return to its place in an hour, then reduce the dislocation first, and then reverse it: if it has fallen back into its place at the tip, let it remain there; but if it has fallen back at the base, raise it with your left hand, and if you wish to do so, turn it over on itself, and apply heat to the joint.
Then let there be two ends of the tool; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the tail, so that it enters one end into the other, and there will be two ends of the tool; and this is its form of cauterization:
In some cases, the point is adjusted according to the following count, because there are three cauterizing tools:
Then pause the cautery over the tip of the tongue with salt, and then make it adhere to the tongue firmly, and do not worry if it hurts for a moment, until it is at rest.
If the dislocation is at the tip and it hurts, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed tool or a sharp tool, because the joint is secure and the moisture is troublesome, and the disease is healed.
Chapter   .xxvi.
On cauterization for the stomach:
When there is a cold and moist food entering the stomach, and it multiplies the humors of that food within it, and if you continue to treat it with these same remedies and do not consult about it, then let the disease remain in its place, and let the patient lie down; and extend his legs, and make three cuts on the foot, a distance of one finger apart, making each cut with a pointed tool, and between them two that are not cut, which will form a triangle; and stretch those between them that are not cut.
And if the depth of the cut is three times the thickness of the tail, then let it be.
And this is the addition to the above form: A, if you wish, cauterize with a large cauterizing tool in the middle of the stomach according to the above form; and this is the shape of a circle according to the above form:
Then cauterize the stomach puncturing at that place where the cauterizing tool scares you: and this is done according to the quantity that you wish to measure, and then cauterize it with another cauterizing tool at the points; and clean thoroughly that which has been cauterized, until it heals.
Chapter .xxviI.
On cauterization for a fractured limb:
When the pain in the limb is caused by cold, or moisture, or a strong wind, which is not normal for it, and does not benefit from drinking water, then let the disease remain in its place, and let the patient lie down; then make three cuts on the foot, at a distance of one finger apart, making each cut with a pointed tool, and between them two that are not cut, which will form a triangle; and stretch those between them that are not cut.
Then let the space between each cut be according to the length of a finger; and this is the shape of the cauterizing tool according to the thickness of the finger:
And do not compress it with your hand.
And if the quantity of water that has been taken in is double the quantity of the contents of the container, and if it is not sitting on its own; then let it lie down, which has already stretched its legs, and raise his arms.
You can also cauterize with a sharp knife, if you have skill and caution in the art.
And beware that you do not overheat in the cauterization, and let the contents of all the container be heated so that it reaches the limbs, because the contents here are subtle; and know that fire is dangerous.
Chapter .xxviii.
On perforation of a herniated disc by cauterization:
When you have an excution or hernia in the limb and want to know if it is in the muscle of the limb or in the membrane, then if it is in the muscle of the limb, the disease will become more painful and heavy.
If it is in the membrane of the limb, the pain becomes very severe and often causes great fatigue for the person who suffers from it.
Then turn the patient over so that their back is up against the bed; and prepare the area for the abscess to be opened, and apply heat to the cautery, which is shaped like a knife blade, as described on the previous page. Then cauterize it until all of the cord is cut, so that it reaches the cipha, so that it burns out and heals.
Then clean it out by opening the other abscesses as well, in order for them to heal.
Do not use this form of cauterization except when the person has a very severe case of gout, and when other methods have failed; but rather leave that one alone, and use those instead, for they are better.
Chapter .XXIX.
On the Cauterization of Wounds.
They said that the ancient cautery of arnica for plagues is to rub it on in this manner; and you should take a piece of arnica with a long point, which can be found, and make it the same length as the finger affected.
Then submerge that one in oil and burn it on the fire, and cauterize with a small cautery at the spot between the ribs where the collarbone meets; and two small cauteries to the left of the beard at its edge, and two more between the fifth rib and the navel, slightly depressed towards the back; and one cautery over the stomach, and three more at the back, and one between the shoulders.
Do not cut off your own hand with the cauterizer, unless it is in danger of gangrene.
And they said that some men use a cautery made of iron similar to a ray and heat it; then place it in the spot between the ribs so that it reaches the cipha (a type of organ or body part), so that it burns out and heals, as we have said above regarding the abscess on the foot.
But in this piercing, do not use a cauterizer, for it is dangerous; for often it happens that the wound comes out through the fistula at the spot where there should be no healing.
Chapter.XXX.
On the Cauterization of the Arm.
When you treat the gout in the arm with water as described above for the division of the wound, do not apply your own cauterization; but then there are three ways to cauterize it, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four small holes according to the length of the arm according to the shape of the cauterization on the foot, the shape of which has been described.
And between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of applying the cauterization is the same as that described for the cauterization on the foot.
Do not cut off your own arm with the cauterizer; and the patient should be lying on their back.
And another way to cauterize is to ignite the cautery with two fingers, which causes the fire described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle; and raise the arm up so that the patient’s hand is turned towards their body.
And this elevation should be done according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made at different heights.
Then insert two fingers between the two ignitions, ignite them, and then put them through the opening of the arm from the other side.
Then remove the cauterizer; and there are now four cauterizations.
And if you have three fingers between the two ignitions, then cauterize with a cauterizer having three fingers between the two ignitions.
Then clean the cauterizer before using it again; for it is better to be safe than sorry, since there are other causes that have preceded this treatment in the course of a disease.
Chapter.XXXI.
On the Cauterization of Hydropic Wounds.
Do not cauterize in hydropic wounds unless they are really bad; but rather use a different method.
When you treat the hydropic with the methods described in the division of wounds and do not apply your own cauterization; but then there are four ways to cauterize it: three on the edge of the bladder and one on the belly, another on the foot, another on the arm, another between the shoulders, and one on the right hand or foot. And the amount of depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the severity of the wound.
Then leave the cauterizer in place so that it remains in place and does not move for a long time.
Do not evacuated the patient’s blood with the cauterizer by water; so that it is mixed with two parts of blood, and then shake it up with three parts, and then add six parts of warm water, and then drink it as a medicine.
The shape of the cauterized belly should be similar to that which is being cauterized; and the same goes for the feet, according to their previous form.
Chapter.XXXII.
On the Cauterization of the Feet and the Cows.
When the feet have hydropic abscesses and are full of clear water, then cauterize them between the second and third toes, lifting the hand with the cauterizer and not twisting it; then lift the hand, and do not return it all the way down, as the clear water will evaporate.
Then make two small cauterizations on the two toes, and in each cow make one at the end of the cutler’s cauterizer. Then apply the cauterization according to the length of the cow: one above and another below the middle part of the cow; and on each cow make two cauterizations.
Then leave the wound open to air-dry for a long time, so that no water remains in it.
Then treat those causes which have been described.
Chapter.XXXIII.
On the Cauterization of the Belly.
When the belly is wet and sore from rubbing, and the digestion and retention of food are affected, which are in the belly and intestines, then treat it with the methods of treatment described for the stomach and do not apply your own cauterization; but then there are four ways to treat it: one over the belly according to the shape of a cutler’s cauterizer, another on the circle of the navel, a third on the edge of the intestines, a fourth on the inner part of the belly, and one at the top of the navel or below it, and two more.
And if the patient has abundant water and accepts it, then treat it with a large cauterizer on the belly and the intestines, and a smaller one over the navel, and two more between the shoulders, since this is a perfect treatment that is not harmful; but do not use your own cauterization.
Chapter.XXXIV.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When the cause of hemorrhoids is a natural one from rough or corrupt water, then treat it with water as described in the division and do not apply your own cauterization; but then there are three ways to treat it: one over the pus between the shoulders of the two small ones, another on the top of the navel, and one below it cutely; and two more between the shoulders.
And if you think that the patient’s stomach is wet and his food is not digested, and that his face is red at times, then cauterize him on the stomach with a strong cautery according to how it came about; and with one cautery on the foot, and another cautery on his thigh, use a clavicle cautery, and leave the cautery in place for a while, and then treat the inside that is to be healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of cauterization of wounds, take away their bandages.
When you cut off the bandages, then put on the fire the cautery that is gathered there. Then place the fire in the wound where the bandage was cut off, and let his hand rest there so that the fire reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes out.
And make one or two cuts, because if the feet are cold, then cauterize each of them according to what we have calculated, and then treat those who sweat there with water so that they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a strong cautery on the sole of the foot, it is better to wait for a while.
Chapter .xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature during the breaking of meat.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is scared by water, heal it with fire.
Then when there is a fistula in nature that becomes old, and corrupt moisture is produced there, and water is put on it that is proper for that particular test, and then take the quantity of its depth with the front mentioned test.
Then set fire to the cautery that is like fire. And then place the burning cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it enters the test.
And repeat over that fire as many times as the corrupt bodies are burned up once or two or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And guard against the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the channel of the bladder or the belly, then guard all places; and do not pour water there unless the fistula is in a fleshy place, and you think it may penetrate.
And then treat the area that needs to be healed.
And if the wound is closed, and the materials are cut off from it, and time has passed like that, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not kept by him, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the belly of him; or water comes from those causes for which there will be remembrance in its place.
Chapter  .xxxvii.
Of the cauterization of the lungs.
When there is pain in the lungs because of rust or strong wind, and because of this the cough of the patient is increased, then you will know that you should cauterize them on the lungs with a clavicle cautery that causes remembrance.
Then cut very lightly cauterize on the second with a little knife, so that three small cauteries will come out, and then wait for a while.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is a breach and softening in the bladder because of rust and moisture so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize them at the lower part of the left side of the bladder with a knife, and cauterize on the right side with a cautery.
And make the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the hair; and cauterize with a cautery on the lower part of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And use a clavicle cautery according to how it came about.
Chapter .xxix.
Of the cauterization of the throat.
When there is rust and moisture in the throat, and because of this there is difficulty in breathing, and the patient’s breath comes out with a hiss, then you will know that the place should be cauterized with three cauteries on the circuit of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with one cautery on the lower part of the left side of the two, or with two cauteries, and use a clavicle cautery.
Chapter .xl.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the jaw.
When there is moist air in the channel of the jaw, and the causes of its discharge from its place are that it is prolonged over the other when compared with them. And the dislocated place is turned towards him on the left side.
Then cauterize the patient on the left side of the jaw with a cautery that resembles fire, and because you will have a test in the circuit of the dislocated place, as it is rolled over, so that the place falls into its place in the circle.
And use the same cautery to cauterize the stomach as was used before.
If this cautery is not yours, then cauterize with three cauteries with a very large olive cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the bitterness of the whole cord; and then treat that place where it needs to be healed.
Chapter  .xli.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When there is pain in the jaw, and because of rust and moisture, the patient is not cured with water that we have mentioned, and if water is not effective, then you will know that the patient must be cured with pills that are fermented or artificial or resembling them; and then cauterize.
And the way of cauterizing in that place is according to two ways: either cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
The first is that you cauterize with burning medicines, and the second is that you cauterize with fire. Of these two ways, the first is this: that you cauterize on the part of the tongue with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make them deep. And space between each cautery is the quantity of its thickness, and if the olive or large cautery is used.
A few times may be cauterized on the middle of the head because there are four cauteries.
If you want, cauterize with the circle that surrounds the shape in which the jaw is dislocated, and this circle is a large one; and burn the bitterness of the whole cord.
This is the way to cauterize in case pain adheres to the jaw and does not extend into the cough.
But if it is extended into the cough, then cauterize with two cauteries on the cough on the part that surrounds the patient's jaw, and to make four cuts a little more than one; and to cut the cheek.
And if the cautery is cutting, and it is deep according to the quantity of the bitterness of the cord.
And if the patient's pain is extended into the lower part of the jaw, then cauterize with three or four points or more if necessary.
And if the patient's pain is on the left side of the jaw, then cauterize with a cutting cautery.
And be careful in all cauterization that you do not end the cautery until you have burned the nerves or great arteries, and that by doing so you are above the patient's misfortune or restraint.
And I have already seen one or another of those who were cauterized on the shin and ended up in the cauterization, and the bed was burned until the tumor reached the foot, and was pierced and corrupted all the foot. And then happened a very great remedy for the belly, and death came by water.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each according to this method.
And the wise said in the cauterization of water cauterize with which this is the method: make a circle of iron whose circuit is most a palm; and it should be at its opening according to the thickness of a thumb or half a palm.
And inside that circle is another third; and be the distance between them the quantity of the nail of the hand; and let those circles be open from both sides; and be the length of those bars one or two nails, and make in those margins of iron nicely dressed in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then set fire to it in the fire until it burns and gives off sparks, and then place it on the edge of the water, the patient lying on his back. And therefore cauterize that one three cauterizes curved in a single curve.
And then leave it for three days; and plaster that one with liniment and leave the wound open for seven days; and then heal that one with oil until it is healed.
Al-Bukashi said: O, son, of this species of cauterization we have used little for the fear of looking at it, and for this reason we have found few who look up at it.
More of these cauterizations were done to him who suffered them, and he turned his back on it.
More cauterizations with medicinal oils is that you make two circles havent armed pierced in which they should put the nail of the iron door; be the length of the bar in the thickness of their nails are two or three nails, and make those circles open from both sides.
And if the distance between each one is the quantity of the thickness of a thumb; and they are open from below and above, and let them contain themselves among themselves according to this form:
And then place it on the edge of the water, the patient lying on his side, and press your hand over the edge of the water; and take a tail of water between two circles, and the quality of that be with small fire little by little, and endure the patient's pain and dryness - for that one has such pain as when of fire - until the pain ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wash out the tail of water from all the shin with two-hand water.
And then leave it for three days and place it on that plaster until the dryness of the adhesion remains, and leave it open for several days, and let it run with salt water; this is after healing.
And then heal that one with oil until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the crotch or the leg, make it stand on the ground according to what was done in the water in the Shin's stretching.
And this is the way of water tail, and I have already written it in the treatise of medicine's correction. Take alkali and the cause not extinct of both in two parts one, and twist them and place them on a new wave from which the edge is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
Then place the tail of the other wave above, and get it on that alkali and the live cause of two-hand water whose quantity is one thumb, and then press those with your good compression, and leave the wave that sends up from it water sharp in the edge of those to the wave above.
And then adjust all that water, and get it on another live cause and other alkali, because that one is of a strong heat that sharpens it, which is administered in the medicines' operations of medicine and cauterization of the other members, because operation makes fire.
And then from medicines some of which is cauterized wide, as well as being mixed and put together.
And Gualia reported of an old man the operation and cure with which he was healed of the pain of the shin and the sciatic vein, and he praised it very much because it is cured in one day, for that one is a little strong in soaking and drying up already, as it is known from that.
And it is because of the certain plant, and if it is not green, it should be a recent fig; and let it be twisted with a little salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or in the crotch, or in the leg, and let it be tied.
And leave it for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient' pain stays dry from adhesion.
And then place it in a bath and when the man's body is heated, put that one into the sun because the pain ceases and is healed.
And you know that you do not need to add anything else to these medicines except for the removal of the body.
More Ja Escorides said that when the goat's vein is cauterized, it would be better to use oil; and let cauterize be done according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the feet of the foot and between the toes.
And then take dry goat's vein and ignite it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it until it is dried up. And then repeat water, and do not cease to water until the fire of the pain reaches the water in the shin and the pain stops.
This method of cauterizing is called cow's cauterization.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the cauterization of pain in two parts.
Some days' pain is in two parts because of two causes: because of the impingement or because of hitting or because of excessive elimination, and because of those that resemble it, from the infusion of rubbing and moist material.
And cauterization is not made except in this single specialty which is done because of the infusion of rubbing material.
So then excessive elimination of the patient with pills given that are similar to it, which are done over both parts in which the pain is three lines according to the thickness of the man' side; and because there are ten cauterizations or more, according to the quantity that comes out from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And let cauterization be done with a cauterizing point.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauterizations or four cauterizations on the median claw according to this form:
Chapter LXIII.
Of cauterization at the beginning of gingivitis.
Some days' pain is present in these small children; and the beginning of it is detected in the children's structure in the evening the raising and moving.
And it hurts at the bottom of the two vertebrae and the little nails of the man which have already started to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to stop it, cauterize that pointed cautery so that it is circular according to this form: so that the cautery takes on all parts of the spine in equal measure.
And if you want to, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery making two or three lines. Then bring the points close together.
And then clean up the area as much as possible so that it heals well with what we have said.
May also guard that the cautery is not administered in a swelling that is made by spasms of nerves.
Chapter .xliv.
Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, since gout of a febrile cause is cured with the manner of cure and not renewed as to the pains, then renew the cauterization.
And this is because you cauterize that close evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with a sharp cautery.
And it is a cautery of olive oil whose form is like this:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains push into the toes or into other joints, and it has moved suddenly, then cauterize that on each toe with three or four of all parts with this olive oil cautery.
And if you have many of these cauterizations that these cauterizations are necessary to you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery before, be only so much as the skin of the foot.
And if the pains push into the toe and the second, then administer the cautery that we have said in the previous chapter.
And if the pains are only in one place and it is called sugar, then make two points in the circuit of the toes as it turns over, making two lines.
And if the pains remain in these two, then make points in the circuit of the toes on each toe and on the edge of the hand.
And if the pains push into the sides or under the muscles, then cauterize each of all parts of the aid.
And you do not evacuate the patient of good order and of good reception of medicines, because if it is done in good order and the flame is evacuated with this cautery, healing will be accomplished, God helps.
Chapter .xlv.
Of Cauterization for Breaks
When a break is made in the armpits and the intestines come out before the elbow, and it begins to move, then cover that you command to the patient to leave his food in the day and to use gentle causes so that the break does not send from his belly.
Then follow the patient between your two legs, and command him to hold his arm within that it is not seen or appears the intestine or the budel.
Then return that with the fingers of your hand and try the break on the bones of the spine with a pointed finger, seeing if it is similar to a half-circle.
Then light the cautery whose form is like this:
within that it is not hot and gets shiny lights. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient’s thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then pause the cautery on that mark with your hand and the cautery to the right, then see if you can reach the bones of the spine in the middle of the back; and repeat this on the other side if you cannot get to them in the first place through the spine.
Then observe carefully the burning of the intestine during your cauterization that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient it does not come to death or another great evil.
And you know that when you have the cautery and you do not see the bone, do not perform the operation.
Then cover that the cautery of children is subtle according to their age and measure.
Then clean up the area of the cauterization for three days with a sharp tool so that the flame of the fire does not touch it.
Then cover that with the others in gentle manner so that it heals.
And the patient be sitting on his legs for 40 days within that it is sealed the area and the plague.
Then pause the nutrition of him according to the length of time of his cure, so that the intestine does not burn outside due to the effort of healing.
Then when you want to take it off after 40 days, then administer it carefully and properly, and keep it for another 40 days.
Then it is a change of work and of the repetition of food and drink, and of careful effort, because when using this complete regimen all will heal.
Then see the cure of breaks in other parts of the belly, and first, and if you want to, cauterize that break with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and so that it is removed from the skin as well as the third time; and then clean up that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
Then already say others that the first break is cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with this shape:
And a line is paused that goes up through the middle of the break, and another line downwards; and your hand over one of the lines with a pointed cautery, may the first cauterization be made faster and better.
Chapter .xliv.
Of Cauterization for Twisting
When there is pain in the limbs by injury or percussion, and that pain persistes for a long time and does not respond to cure with medicines, then you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery.
Then the cauterization of each limb according to its size and age, and its virtue and development, and its location of twisting and pain.
Then if healing is achieved by the first cauterization, it is good; and if not, then repeat it over him; because, usually, those pains are marks of a limb that is broken to another limb, so that, if you can reach it with cauterization, healing will be accomplished for the patient.
Chapter .xlvii.
Of Cauterization for Leprosy
The leeches are found in certain places by cauterization as a great help, and cautiously if the leprosy is caused by decay of flame and melancholy.
And therefore, if you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is caused by decay of flame and melancholy. Then treat it with the water we have said in the division, and do not apply it to the head, nor to the neck, nor to the back of the neck; then cauterize it on the top of the head at the middle place, and on the second one from behind, over the forehead near the end of the hair; and both on the two sides; and behind, on the back of the neck.
And finally place your hand with the cautery a little further inside, so that it presses upon bone and causes a slight contraction, and then move the scalpel so that the exhaled thick vapors are eased; and cauterize on the muscle according to what is needed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the loins and appears manifestly so, then cauterize those which you cauterized on the head; and on the tip of the nose, and on two points on the cheekbones, and on two points on the skull behind the ears, and on one point near the jaw, and on the jaw itself, and on two points on the shoulders, and on a single point on each breastbone, and on the two shoulder blades and on one point on each of them, and on the two elbows, and on the two wrists, and on both feet, and on the two toes, and on the two knees. And cauterize all these joints of the body and of the feet, and on the ball of each foot, and on the heels of their feet; and cauterize each tendon of their feet.
And keep away from the nerves that are above the bone so that you do not burn those.
And some of them are cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the little finger and with another on the opening of the stomach, and with another on the anus.
And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more it will heal and be confirmed; and know that the loins do not feel pain in cauterizing them, since they are dull, but the body is stupified by the heat of the fire.
And know that the size of the cauterization should be according to the limbs and joints, following the application of the tools.
Then clean the cauterization with a scald of warm water and salt, then apply a poultice of warm milk to heal it.
Chapter. XLVIII.
Of the stupor of cauterization.
And when a member is stiffened or numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and does not heal, then you should cauterize the stiffened member with cauterization according to whether it is large or small.
And let this small cauterization enter a little into the tendon. Then clean that with oil, so that it heals.
And some of them are sterilized with the same cauterization that goes to the limbs and feet, and to the shoulder blades behind the ears, and the nerves that move those members are burned; and the stupor remains.
Do not advance further unless you know the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire body.
Chapter. XLI.
Of the cauterization of scars that have become hard.
And when the scar is old and does not respond to any medicine, then you should cauterize it with a small cauterization according to the thickness of the tendon, so that the whiteness and the color of it are changed, and the color of it is altered.
Then clean it with flour and lentils, with rosin oil and leaves of hornbeam, and with the juice of hawthorn or st. John's wort, mixing all together; then put a cloth over the area and let it rest until it heals.
Chapter I.
Of the cauterization of the crust.
And when the canker is beginning to appear and you want to remove its edge, then cauterize it with a circular cauterization in the path of the crust's rotation.
The wise said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in that place; but to me it has not been seen, for I have seen it a few times.
And it is said that it should be cauterized in the path of the crust with a circle, as I have said, or with a pointed cauterization.
Chapter L.
Of the cauterization of the abdomens.
And when an abdomens is delayed in maturity, and thus it produces the fruit, or by age of the loins, because it is old in decay, of poor quality, or because of time, and you want to accelerate its maturity; then cauterize it in the path of the loins with a small pointed cauterization; and let it ripen quickly.
But if you want to pierce it with cauterization, then you should ignite the fire of the cauterization in this way: and place it in the middle of the abdomens where it will penetrate.
Then if the cauterization is placed in that place that is left free, so that the spine is relieved; and then clean that with oil, so that it heals.
Chapter II.
Of the cauterization of the corrosive.
Corrodent is a walking corruption in the limbs, which corrupts that way as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Then if that corrosive appears in a place where it can be cauterized with fire, then you should ignite small pointed cauterizations, and large ones according to the need in that place where it is corrosive.
Then clean all of it completely with one cauterization, so that you eradicate all the corruption and do not leave any cause for worry.
Then let it rest for three days, and place a cloth over the cauterized areas every other day, so that all the scars are completely healed and all corruption is eradicated.
Then clean that with warm oil.
But if after three times the meat is born healthy and is not corrupted, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on those places that are corrupted.
Corrodent is cured with some medicines of acute nature, because cauterization is half-effective in that place. But cauterization with fire is more useful.
I have already said that its cure is with an acute medicine in the division, and now take it when you need it urgently.
Chapter .liii.
On Cauterization of Claws and the Other Semblants.
The claws of the foot that is called a claw, and it is a great cause, opening, which makes the foot hurt; and cauterizing them is done with two methods, with fire and water tail.
The method of cauterizing with fire is that you ignite the cauterizing substance resembling ash, which is made of iron in a certain quantity corresponding to the claw's whole width, and is of thin margins.
And place that ignited one on the claw, and move your hand around the claw so that the cauterizing substance reaches the claw's depth. And leave it for three days within which it begins to stink. And apply that with dried-out wild garlic, and leave the plaster on it for a night, as it should dry out its roots.
And cure the area with an ointment of fresh meat within which it is healed.
And if it does not heal over, and sightless spots appear on the surface of the body, mostly on the hands and feet, then do the following: take a little quantity of water tail, and place that on the claw; and gently pour a little amount of fire-water onto it, and wrap your hand around it, and you rotate that with a compression of your hand continuously, and press the margin of the tube into the claw's root, and let the water tail run down the claw's root; and wait for the patient to taste the water tail for an hour, and then remove that, as the claw should not lose its roots.
And in this way treat each one of those separately within which they appear all over the body.
And cure those pustules that the claws' roots are eradicated with an ointment of fresh meat, which is made with watertail.
Chapter .liiii.
On Cauterization of Tremors.
When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever caused by rubbing, or from a similar cause, then do the following: if you have four spondyls in the foot, place one cauterizing substance between each spondyl; and on the foot's sole, and over the belly, with an olive cauterizing substance.
And the tremors of the leg should subside, and the healing of the fever-caused disease should hasten.
Chapter .lv..
On Cauterizing White Accidents on the Body.
When white accidents appear on the body, and pus-filled pustules are formed from corrupted matter; then, as soon as they appear, they should be cauterized at their whole length with a thin edge of fire; or with the hair of a long-cut comb; or with a slow-burning substance.
And some spots are cauterized as they come out continuously according to this way; and they should not be scarred, and the excess is removed by doing that, and those spots are healed from those.
However, in order that water be evacuated continuously with bloodletting.
Chapter lvi..
On Cauterizing a Bloodletting Flow of White Accident by Incision of Arthros.
The flow of white accident that is cut through the plague which it should be removed, or through the incision of pustules or member's cauterizing, and in similar cases, and it is difficult to recover from that.
Then if some water appears, then do the following: place your hand over the orifice of the artery, and place that over it so that the blood flow is stopped at the orifice, and does not run out.
And place a few large and some small olive-colored cauterizing substances on it, and exhale that over them within which they should be ignited.
And apply that to the small or large one according to the location and plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein continuously before you recover your breath, and then cauterize within which it should be stopped and closed.
And if the blood flows out of the artery's orifice while you are holding your breath and exhaling the cauterizing substance, then take another cauterizing substance that is prepared in fire, and if it does not stop, apply that to a small part within which the blood is stopped.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not run onto the patient' other evil.
And you should know that when the artery' blood flows, then it is not possible to stop the blood in those, and more so when the artery is large, if it is not done with one of four methods: or cauterizing as it is said, or extracting as it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him melt and the blood is stopped, or that it is held with a strapping rope by a strong tension, or that they are placed on medicine of which the virtue is to stop the blood; and those are tightened with a pulvinar cloth.
Then that which administers a strapping tension of him and a strong tension by a rope, or by position due to fire and similar causes, does not confer more than a small amount.
Then if some water appears, and it is not the present medicine or remedy, then do the following: open the orifice of that vein with a small incision as said, and understand to the great constriction of him within which the blood is stopped from the plague' supreme part, and over the artery, the incised part should not be recovered; and on it, sprinkle water of high coldness due to a large amount of freezing within which the blood is congealed and thickened; and then prepare cauterizing or medicine as necessity demands.
On Incision and Piercing of Veins and of Bloodletting and of Plagues and of Their Similarities.
We have said in the First Chapter all disease for which cauterizing with fire is suitable and medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments used in those, and we order the Chapters of the Subjection of the Head to the Feet.
And I will proceed in this Chapter by that method, so that it is cleared what you seek, then over that which you have sought.
And before I begin with him, know that in this Chapter it is for the fear of water that is in the First Chapter of Cauterization.
And for water that is in great caution, for in the operation which is in this Chapter, some spots are evacuated continuously, which is made to the life by sprinkling the vein or incision on the pustule or opening of discharge or purging of the plague or stabbing with an arrow or opening of gold, and similar things. And of all those you accompany fear and trembling, and in most of them death comes.
And I warn you that over you does not fall water in which you are resting, for some spots may cause you harm by the ways of ill people. And of them is some that goes away to his own disease and it is hidden death from him by the velocity of water which finds its disease, and from the length of his disease, and at his disease is the fear of which means death.
And of those who give you trouble and talk to you, waiting for them is health, but their sickness is destructive.
And so I cannot agree with you on this issue regarding this person; and your caution should be greater than your laziness and your greed; and do not assume any reason for this other than a certain verified knowledge which demonstrates that to you, and for whom this worthy success is due.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases by prognosis and indication to this one which is beneficial, for in that one is an aid to you in acquiring fame and memory, worthy of praise and glory.
O son, God inspires your understanding and does not tell you his direction and protection, for in him is his might.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauterization, from the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be pleasant to you from this one which you ask for and from which you needed.
Chapter first.
Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Do you know that this disease is seen first in children, and when the child's head is heated, it becomes lighter.
And some are seen first due to a hidden cause that is not known.
I have not seen this disease except in children; and all those that I have seen it in, have died, and therefore it is a terrible work in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head remained larger than it should be due to the moisture increased until death came.
This moisture is either added between the jaw and the ear, or it is added below the ear on the side of the head.
For the operation in that one if the moisture is between the jaw and the ear, and the pus is little, then you should make a cut in the middle of the head in a slit shape, and let the length of the slit run into two openings where the moisture runs out, and this is the form of the spatium:
And if the moisture is increased and the pus is larger, then here are two slits according to this way:
And if the moisture is below the ear, the sign of it is that you see the mouth of the head open from all sides, and water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand to the inner side, and there is no sign of it becoming lighter. Then you should make three slits in the middle of the head according to this way:
And then the incision will come out with all the moisture; and strengthen the slits with drapes and plumsols; and tie it up, and treat the plague with remedies and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed it with dry food that has little moisture so that the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another way of incision, which you can consider depending on the size of the pus and the collection of water; for some are seen in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore decide to make the incision where the pus and the water fill up, and pour it out according to what is most possible.
And observe that you do not incise the artery, and that you do not disturb the pulse lines of blood and morality for this flow of blood in order to evacuate moisture from it.
Chapter second.
When there is a catarrh or a rumour in the throat or in the foot, and it is old, and you do not confer this cure to it from medicines, then the last cure in this is an incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those who are hurting their head, and apply a rough cloth to the area so that the veins appear, and make it strong with a certain cloth; and consider where the pulse is beating; and hide the places of some on the places that are close to the ears, and in some people they remain hidden.
And then strengthen the pulse with remedies, and cut each one from a certain opening towards the bone, and let it be by the length of the head.
And if you want to, insert the incision below the artery and trim what is in front of it.
And let the length of the incision be two inches apart, for when a vein is incised, the pulse beat becomes quick; and it can break out quickly.
More if the pulse does not feel strong, then you should measure the distance from the ear with three fingers, and then try to incision where it is; and let it go into the bone.
And that the quantity of blood is a cup and a quarter. And so much blood comes out of it as the quantity shows from the goodness of the disease and from the collection of blood in it.
And consider the plague, and if there is a cause of it in the side of the head, then incision should be made where there is no pus.
And strengthen the plague with drape and cloth, and cure it with ointments that heal it.
Chapter III.
On the Extraction of Arthritis from the Joints.
When an old, chronic, or catarrhal fever arises from dampness and quality in the temples, or is violent and similar to those, and is not treated with medicines, then we have devised a treatment for these maladies by extracting arthritis from the joints, or cauterizing those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient rubs the hairs which are in the temples; and understands the joint apparently in the temple where it is shown by his hand, and is hidden except in a few men for the violence of the fray.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and the place rubbed with a coarse cloth or the place moistened with hot water until the joint appears clearly to you. Then take this spatula, whose form is as follows: And then you should cut the cord with that which has ease until you reach the joint; and put it on the edge and extract that from the cord, and uncover that of the tunics which are left that joint, altogether.
Mayst if the artery is thin, then wrap that with the end of the knife, and cut a part from it according to the quantity by which the extremities of him are drawn together and contracted, and will not find blood flowing, because if they are not cut there will not be blood gushing out.
Then discharge the blood from the wound with a sponge. Once.
And if the joint is large, then wrap that which you cut with double strength of silk or cord, and do not tie it in front of the consolidation of the wound and find blood flowing.
Then cut off the excess which is between two ligaments; and do it at that time or another hour.
And if you will, cauterize that with cauterizing iron within the bone according to cautery cutting the extremities of him, and keep in place that part of the work.
And is better work unless the patient has fever or is in a scorbutic state; because cauterization helps the drying up of humors, and therefore is better in juice.
And then extract the arthritis which is in the place of the old, and let it rest on dry powder, and cure with dry medicines so that the flesh may be healed and the skin made whole within.
And if, while you are working, any other pain of the joint is felt, then tie that pain up, or with cauterizing, or with the place where you feel the pain, and strengthen your hand within so that the pain may be stopped. And if for some reason that is not presented to you, then pause the treatment on the place within so that the pain may be calmed, and put that place in water of great coldness within so that the keenness returns, and strengthen according to what it finds.
And this is more successful in extracting arthritis than cauterizing the vein with one knife; for you have made two cuts in the place by reaching out, and pause each one, like lighting a fire, within so that they reach the bone and cut the vein into two places, so that blood may flow between the extremities of him, because it is not consolidated with this cauterizing.
This is the form of the cauterization:
The keenness of both knives is equal. But nevertheless, if the keenness of the two knives is less, because if sharp, with two knives it properly to each one, and does not cut flesh with a speed.
So that where there is some thickness, the heat of fire is held in them and the flesh is discharged gently.
This work is better than all works and lighter.
Be the space between the two knives the quantity of the thickness of the knife.
Chapter IV.
On the Treatment of Acute and Acid Rheumatism of the Joints.
When it is acid rheumatism, and it is the joints of those veins which run on the top of the head that do not admit to any cause in the treatment of medicines, and often the face of the patient becomes swollen and wrinkled as if it were wrinkled by ants, and the joints of him are worn out, they get hot as if they were baking in the oven, those joints being scalded by the keenness of tears, and small blisters forming on them from the acuteness of the inflammation; therefore, do not apply that treatment with rubbing.
And it is that you command the patient to rub his hair which is on his forehead, and cut three creases in the forehead equidistant apart according to its length. And if the length of the crease falls two times: the first crease is equidistant from the tip of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the hair which is on the brow; and the third from the other side.
And keep back from the incision of joints which are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both. And if the space between each incision is three times the length of a finger.
And you have a dry sponge or cloth with which to dry up the blood.
And put together the sharp ends of two joints, whose form is as follows: Which is from the joint of the temple to the second incision. Remove all the cord which is between two cuts with the edge of the knife which is on the bone, and put that in the middle of the incision within to the second incision. Then put this sponge in the first incision or another tool which is called a knife, taking from one side and from the other not taken.
Then cut off the hair of him from the edge which is next to the flesh next to the cord, and leave it hanging from the bone, and cut off all vessels which descend from the head to the joints.
And if it is continued the incision to the water which is next to the cord, and cut that in the middle of the crease within to the other crease.
And then, if a quantity of blood comes from the incision, squeeze the places of the joints of the blood which is clotted.
And then pause in each crease a little piece of velvet, and rest on dry powder which is mixed with oil and vinegar, and pour that so as not to cause an apoplexy by cauterizing.
And on the third day, take off the ligament and administer a great infusion of hot water or tea, and then cure that with basilic oil or rose water and other things so that the wounds are made whole.
Chapter V.
On the Treatment of Lacrimation by Cataract and to the joints descending from the places inside the head.
When an animal has acute lacrimation and continued, and often the joints of the patient become very small, and already their eyes are bleary and their eyelids are swollen; and in the forehead is a sharp pain which feels like a toothache, and small blisters form on them from the acuteness of the inflammation; therefore, know that such accidents do not arise except from the catarrh which comes from the places inside the head.
And the best cure in these is: that you command the patient to rub his forehead, and aproach to make an incision on its middle part of the forehead, a small one for its length (and begins at the incision of the left temple within the right temple; and the incision goes within the bone; and your hand extends from the bones of the temples which are better preserved through chewing), before the bone is uncovered.
Dry all the secretions with a sponge or a dry cloth and put it between the two lips of the incision with old lint or a cloth. Then sprinkle on it powdered salt, wet with vinegar and oil so that it does not produce an apoplexy, cauterization.
And when the swelling is decreased, then cover it with a mixture that dries the flesh, which will prevent it from healing, instead of taking two parts of flour and four parts of incense and mixing them together, and making a paste out of it and administering it to these areas where the flesh is being born again.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of water that enters the ears.
All causes that enter the ears are of four species, for either it is mineral water or seems like mineral water, such as iron and lead, or it is of plants, such as mustard or favas, or it is fluidic, such as water and vinegar and their similar things, or some animal.
And therefore, when mineral water or a similar thing enters the ear or any other cause resembling those causes which do not correspond to it, and you raise the ear to the sun, and if the water comes out again, then distil it in that cause of red oil or sesame oil, and administer the extract to him, and make him sneeze with a wind, and put a handkerchief before his face for the arrival of sneezing. Then put some pieces of cloth or wool on the ear, and extend the ear towards the top, for motas (moisteners) are often blown out by this treatment.
And if it is not blown out, then administer the extract to him with the instrument called gentle subtile gesticulator of which this is the form:
And if it is blown out with gesticulator, it is good; otherwise, administer the extract to him with a drop of subtle double-diluted oil.
And therefore, if it is not blown out with water, then make a tube of aram  (a flexible material) and insert the end of the tube into the trauc  (the hole) of the ear and seal it with wax and soft oil so that it does not come out, but the tube remains. Then extract with a sharp wind, for three moisteners with water which we have mentioned.
Or if it is not blown out in this way, then take a round piece of silver or a similar instrument with which the ears are wrapped with a small amount, and put that on the tip of the needle, and wrap it around the ear gently. Then insert that into the trauc   (the hole) of the ear with ease, and dry the ear from moisture.
And therefore, if it is not blown out with all the causes which we have mentioned, then you command him to clean that in advance which will cause an apoplexy or spasm.
And the way of cleaning that is that you command the patient to rub his forehead at the beginning, and extract it in the second way, for the virtue of it, and then make a small incision between his eyebrows, moving your hand slightly, so that the blood comes out through the cut in the middle of the forehead. Then make the incision in the shape of the moon, through which the water enters, and stop that one if you can with an appropriate instrument; then stitch it up quickly, and cure that within which is healed.
And if the cause enters into the ear is one of the fats which are created and inflated, then administer the cure and extract it; but if you do not obey your orders to clear up your ears, then you take a mild solution according to this form: and administer to him the extraction of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
Do not pass water when you think that the ear is already moist with the vapor of the ear, and pause that in pieces of cloth, and extract it from there with les onces   (a measure of oil) or with subtle gesticulator, or with extraction, for it is relieved by the extraction.
But in water which has entered into the ear, it is better that the patient uses sneezing with a wind at the beginning, and fills his own ear with some old wax, and rubs it over the ear, and if by water it is blown out, it is good; and if not, then take two small peaces of stone or metal and cut them according to their length, and wrap those around the fire a little, and put one of them into the hole of his ear, and let him sneeze over the other piece, hitting with another peace on that which is in the ear. Then do not pass water when it enters the ear until all the water has been blown out.
Then do not pass water when it enters the ear until all the water has been blown out. And then, after the water has been blown out, you take paper or a piece of cloth. and put one end in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it is burned up.
Then put the other cloth and make three sneezes until all the water is blown out, and extract it with a tube from above.
But if the extraction of beast enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, then push it out and cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes pain to the head through the veining, then administer the extraction with subtle gesticulator and onces, and this cause is lighter than all the other causes which enter into the ear.
But if the extraction of a verm   (a small creature) enters into that ear, when you cure that with water which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillation, and do not use your own cure, then cover the ear to the sun.
And therefore, if any of the verms appears, then extract it with subtle gesticulator or onces; but if there is no cause, then take a tube which is narrow at one end and wide at the other, and this is the form of it: Then insert the small end of the tube into the ear according to the quantity which it suffers, and extract it with a strong wind, and make water come out, so that all the verms are blown out.
But if you do not obey your orders to clear up your ears, then you wrap it and seal it in the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer the distillation which has already been distilled in the treatment of verms, and you will find water in the treatise on distillation.
And be your effusion with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, and this is its form: Make it of silver or of brass, narrow at one end, so that it has a small hole on top.
And therefore, if you want to use it as an ear-dropper, then make it like this, which is necessary for putting the drops into the cavity of the tube. And if you want, take the tube and wrap it around the tip of it neatly with cotton, and pour oil or juice of some herb, or water of these medicines into the tube – and that is in the ear –, and put the tube on top of it and press your hand there so that the oil is pushed out into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And if it is already inserted in the ear, then it is cut with fire a little bit. And be careful that the cause that you will pour into the ear is not too strong, because ear medicines do not tolerate water.
Chapter. vii.
Of cure for ear ointment.
Some children are born with perforations in their ears, and this sometimes happens to some adults as well, due to plague or flesh wound; and this ointment sometimes occurs in the meatus of the ear by infection or by no injury there; and sometimes it is in the outer part of the ear tragus which does not see the lobe, and sometimes it is in the openings outside.
And that which happens in the meatus of it, which does not see the lobe, is in most difficult situations of healing.
And in that one in which you can see the lobe, cover that you place the ear of the patient to the sun and look at it. And if you see a lot of ointment, open it with a thin spatula in this way:
If the tip of it is small in width, of which one side is sharp and the other not; and the spatula has two edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
And if the ointment is hidden by flesh in the ear or in the meatus, then strike it with a sharp knife easily and cut it quickly so that all the flesh is removed.
And if ointment is in the meatus of the ear, then take a thin tube and burn it slightly with fire, and put that into the meatus of the ear.
And if you have felt the ointment with water that the patient loses easily by hearing, try to press it with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And place in the ear a cloth of the second quantity of the width of the trail that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and make it per day within that you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some, and pour that into water and pulverize it over it three times and use it; and if the ear has already been aching, then cover that you take some and change that with another some that you will wrap in wax which is made to with olive oil, within that it is the ache of cautery that should come out; and treat that until it is healed.
Maybe if you have felt the pain of the plague, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure that you will tighten the flow of the pain of the plague, which is said in the treatise of distillation.
Chapter. viii.
Of cure for the azil that is placed on the eyelids.
That which is placed on the eyelids of some children sometimes becomes sticky, and some are dry.
And if you have those with scaly skin or with ointment, scrape them with a spatula and place them on the three areas.
Maybe if there is pain accompanied by a flow of plague, then you will tighten those with a small caustic cautery.
And the best cauterization is to return those that have been cut and burned when there remains some cause of their razor; and when they are burned with fire, those razors are destroyed and do not return.
Chapter. ix.
Cure for droops that come to the eyelids of children.
Some children have droopiness in their eyelids due to some cause that is combined with swelling and hardness, and because of the great swelling it is called.
The addition of a thick moisture on the eyelids below and above.
Then the operation on them is that you consider if the swelling is caused by something that comes out from under the eyelid and goes all around it; and the cause of it is clearly visible.
Then cut that one with a slit in the width, and strike it easily from all sides until it comes out; and suspend that one with ointment and cut off that one.
And if the figure is great, then you adjust it with sutures; and treat that until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not harm that one because the blood of it restores it and heals it.
And if the swelling is declining inside the eyelids towards the inner surface, then open the eyelids and suspend that one with ointment, another that you will not feel the incision; and press it all over, and if the eyelid by incision becomes long, that does not feel any cause.
Then wash the eyelids with salty water; and treat those places with water that heals until it is healed.
Chapter. x.
Of cure for droops in the eyelid above of the child.
The axcinath that is produced in the tunics of the eyelid above, mainly affects children, and it makes their tears flow much because they do not want to look at the brightness of the sun; and they cannot see clearly.
And so you have them constantly over their faces all the time, and they sleep with their eyebrows wet; and the presence of their hair over their eyes is evident there; and when you touch those places with your fingers, you feel an itchiness there.
And a certain way of operating is in that the patient places his head on the table and you place a cloth on it and cut a little, and make circles according to the quantity that contains artheric from all sides, and then place that one on those fingers all over so that an itchiness is added to the middle of the circle, and then open it in the middle of that humidity with a spatula that cuts through the width, and the cut is not larger than the cut made in flaubotomia.
May I place the ring on your finger as you enter, for in the right position it will fit into the arch of the knuckle and not fall out; because at the top of the hand there is a hollow shape that moves with the motion of the hand.
So that you remove that cloth which you have wrapped between the thighs at the front and turn it between your right and left hands until it is completely removed.
And be careful not to put it into a crevice so that the spearmint does not come out of the hole and stays in place.
May I not put your ring on at the beginning of the crevice, but rather put it into a small crevice first so that it can be removed; and then remove those [ring]s which we have spoken about; and then dip cloth in water and vinegar and place them on the area and tie them together and hold them in place with a knot.
And then put salt on it and place it in the cavity of the crevice so that this salt [remains] with the moisture.
Then treat it so that it may be healed.
May I not put an ointment on the wound if it is suppurating; then treat that [wound] with a cold poultice so that it may be healed.
Chapter 11.
Of ways to test for fever.
When the palms of the hands are red and the natural hairs are erect, it is a sign of fever; then test for fever by applying cold to the palms and observe whether there is a burning sensation and moistness in the area; this is the cause of destruction of the hand which is called touch-and-go of the hand, and can be cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or by incisions and suturing; or with canes according to the direction of vision.
Then place the tip of the thumb at the top of the patient's foot; then rotate your left hand so that the eyelid of the eye turns towards you, and if it remains closed, an needle is inserted into the lid at the point where the hair grows; then let the thread run through the needle and tie it off—near the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs—near the hair, and pull the thread so that it touches the edges; then rotate your hand so that the eye turns away from you.
Then insert the needle into the crease behind the eyelid at the hairline; then let the thread run through the needle and tie it off—near the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs—near the hair, and pull the thread so that it touches the edges; then place a small piece of cloth or gauze on the eyelid and hold it in place with your thumb and finger; then put the eye to the test by looking around.
However, I will tell you that the figure [of fever] is different according to the amount of swelling in the eyelid, for some people have a natural tendency to swell in this area; indeed, there are those who say that it is due to an injection into the eyelids according to the quantity by which the eyelids become swollen.
Then insert the needle into both lines that you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major [eye] towards the lacrimal minor. And if your crevice is near the natural hairline as is the thickness of the king.
Then place the wax on one of the angles of the ring; then scrape it all off, and then secure the thread to both sides of the nose with a thin string or yarn, and wipe off the blood; and if you want to do this, and if not, do not.
Then leave the thread in place for three or four days, and then treat it.
And if you wish, leave the poultice in place until it hardens and contracts, because the eyelid is lifted by the seal of the poultice and its drying effect; but it is better to suture it again: And therefore I will tell you the ancient remedies for this.
However, in such a case there is a risk of damage to the thumb; it is a good operation and not to be feared.
And there is another way to treat it, and that is to make a figure like a leaf on the eyelid; then lift the eyelid with three separate and joined hooks according to this shape:
May I not be able to do this, having the hooks; and if it cannot be turned over, take a needle with thread and run it through the middle of the shape, and insert another hook on the other side near the lacrimal major [eye], and the third hook according to where the lacrimal minor [eye] is; then adjust the threads so that they are equal in length, and hold them between your fingers with a turning motion, and raise the entire ring over the hook on which it sits as if turning it over.
Then adjust the two sides of the poultice with suture, and then treat that area so that it may be healed.
May I not put an ointment on the wound if you have made an incision or a cut; cover it with cloth and bandage it up.
And in some cases the hair of the eyelid is turned towards you, so that it is necessary to use an incision in order to turn them [the hairs] as we have spoken about; but surgery is more natural.
The treatment with canes is according to this form: And you should turn the eyelid and cut it according to what I have said; then provide two thin canes or two small stirrups whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than that of the needle. You have already inserted an incision in both ends of any crevice, where you have the thread.
Then add a little of the medicine to each canes with a thin string; and leave it for some time, because by its constriction the ring will die and rot from within; then treat it again after a few days if necessary.
May I not delay treating it, then break the thread that binds it, and then treat the wound so that it may be healed.
And when it is hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not tickle.
This is the way of using two canes according to this form: and there is neither more nor less of length and width.
Chapter 12.
Of raising the tickly hairs on the hand with a hook when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are not natural, dry and sharp on the hands; then perform the operation in this way: take a small and sharp hook and place it in the fiber of the skin with care; then adjust the ends of the hair so that they do not touch each other; and if you wish to cut them off later, and if not, leave them as they are. And let the length of the thread be a palm's width.
Then tie another small string to it in the middle; and if you wish, cut off one end of that thread.
Then place the thumb at the top of the hand; and let it rest against the palm so that your work is visible, because it is a delicate and small operation.
Then insert the hook into the hairline, adjusting it so that it does not hurt; and let it penetrate the eyelid quickly before removing the hair from the natural line.
Then pull out the hair completely and insert it into the pinhole; let the hairs be one, two or three at most; no more.
And then pull your hand towards that inner part where hair has grown out from the eyelid by the natural hair.
If it is not pulled out but the hair remains, you will pull it out with the tweezers that you have prepared there, because if it is pulled out from above, it will cause a wound.
And take that away with the vision of the heel because if you pull it out, the tweezers will hurt, and when you remove it, the wound will be clean, and leave it closed for two or three days, so that hair does not adhere to the place where it has been removed. and a good wound appears there.
If the hair is too short, then you should take a long hair from your natural hair and raise it up to that place, or you leave it inside where it is longer, and then you raise it up.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure of the eye that is in the eyelid.
When the eye is inflamed and contracted in its eyelid, or to the right or left part, because of a bad consolidation of plague or of a section or of a cauterization, it is called leporine, and this is either natural or accidental, and is done by a consolidation of plague or of sections or of cauterization, or by similarity to their bad effects.
The way to do the operation is that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips, and pause in it what is between those two a strip of cloth, and tie them up so that they are healed.
And do not know if you use the cure of it from the causes that dry up, tighten; for if you make water return to be inflamed, it is worse than nothing at all while burning it.
Use in it from causes that soften thus with fenugrec, and immerse in the water in which there are cow's milk and salt of lime, or apply dandelion, which is dissolved in some oil, and dip the strip into that water, and treat with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all what is not consolidated according to the form that it burns at the beginning.
This operation which we have said is not anything but a correction of inflammation that does not return to the form of the place according to what it burns in front.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of inflammation that is made in the lower eyelid.
This cure which is made in the lower eyelid, which is called by name inflammation; and it is either natural or accidental.
It may also be accidental because of plague, or because of a section, or because of cauterization, or for other similar reasons.
And the way to do that operation is that you take a needle which has double thread, and put it through the flesh, and let it go through the lacrimal bone from the left through the lacrimal bone from the right, so that the thread reaches both extremities of the flesh.
Then return the flesh to its original state with the needle and cut it with the blade widely. Then if it returns to its form according to what it covers, so is it; and if not, take the thread and hold it on the split, and make the two holes in the center of the eyelid, and tie them up.
The two extremities of the two splits should be at different angles to the incision, which you have made where they meet, and may also be a different figure from them.
This shape is a Greek letter: alpha.
Then return that flesh to its original amount because of the width of it taken from that side, which closes the eyelid.
Then adjust those parts that are separated and sew them up with the wool thread; then treat those with water what we have said about the medicinal medicines and baths within which they are healed.
If the inflammation is made through a split or stitch or cauterization, then it is necessary that you cut the flat split on the hair of the eyelid according to what comes before. Then separate those two lips according to what we have said.
In the summary of the speech about the cure of inflammation that is in the lower eyelid or the upper eyelid, which runs in the operation, according to what it is prepared in the form of inflammation, and that is in a form of different shapes.
And the skilled person always prepares it in any way that is possible within it to return the form to the natural shape, or close to that, and that bad one according to what suits it from the operation and of the instruments in the best conditions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to a few men because the eyelid is glued above the edge of the eyeball, and not allowed the ease of movement or its natural functions, then when you insert the tip of the needle into the lower eyelid, raise it up or extend it with the thread.
Then you cut the adhesion with a thin blade, which is not on the sharpness of the incisions, while gently holding the bad one away from the eye so that it does not disturb the operation, and remove the blade which does not damage the eyeball to its sharpness.
That is your incision which easily removes that adhesion so that the eyelid is returned to its original form, and all the adhesion is healed.
Then you put in the eye salt water which you wash with; or distill in it the water of Zuni dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a calva of it, and place on the eye wool infused with album of water, and then the third day use causes that consolidate according to what is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of the eyelid and of the prominence of the lacrimal bone.
Know that the eyelid is according to two ways, because either it is nervous, and it is similar to hard glass thin; or it is not nervous, it is like frozen water, which, when you touch it, or it is forced to take a thread, it is severed and the thread does not stick to it.
And both spices do not begin except from the lacrimal bone, which goes little by little, so that it covers the eye, and stops the light and the movement of the eye.
The way to do the operation with the incision is that the bad one pauses his head in the middle position, and then opens its eyelids, and raises the eyelid towards your hand, and then pick up the needle with two thread twists, and extend those two holes from the center of the eye, and tie them up. Then take a needle and insert it into that hair of the animal or cow or goat's milk or others, or of similar things, or of a strong faith, or double the end of the needle little by little and keep it in the middle of the eyelid, and pass the thread through the needle, and tie it with a knot at the tip of the eyelid; then remove that hair from the edge of the eyelid which closes the pupil. Then you keep that hair inside according to what is behind it.
Then you cut the rim of the lacrimal bone with a sharp blade or small scissors, and remove the flesh of the natural lacrimal bone so that it does not cause continuous tears by cutting it from the inside.
And sometimes cut the eyelid with a long thread or with faith, and then separate it with a sharp blade which is the form of this.
And beware that you do not touch the translucent membrane (the "tunica cornea") with the spatula; nor let it enter in any way in the rupture; and that the pupil is punctured.
Then bring the incision up to the heel a little salt water or very fine ash and let it enter again another day; then treat that which is inside with water so that it may be healed.
If the nail is not nervous and you cannot get the needle into it, or if it is attached to that leg, then treat this kind of nail with medicines, and heal it thus with oil and vinegar in the division.
If you want to cut that off, then open the heel of the patient and take a thin spatula with a sharp edge according to this form: in subtility. and if that is rarefied and confined and enters in that way, then distil from your own heel in the morning with very fine ash or salt water, and let the heel be inside for another day.
Then repeat the operation on that again until it is all better; unless the opposite happens, that is, cauterize [it] in the heel because then when you leave it, treat the cauterization at first so that it may be healed.
Then repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
The removal of the lacrimal bone, if you see great harm in it in the heel, shall be suspended with an ounce; and cut off a piece from that one, and do not cut off all the incision so that it does not cut off the flow of tears.
Then distil in the lacrimal heel with fine ash  [and] morning medicine until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the incision of algarrobate and of that which is born of meat attached to the heel.
Some in the heels of the eye is born meat that is tender, and it lies close to the pupil, or approaches or sticks to the eyelids; it presses the eyelids together as though they were pilastres and is joined to the cheekbones.
The operation on it is that the patient rests his head on the pillow; then open the heels of that one and collect all that meat with a sharp knife, and with water; and with a forceps or a hook; then cut off that meat at first so that all is finished with the incision, and beware of the heel that you do not tear it to pieces your operation.
And be your incision that with which you cut those or the spatula that we have recalled in the incision of the nail; or with small forceps according to which one comes, and treat it thus as soon as the form of it arrives.
Then when your incision is complete and all that meat is removed, then fill the heel with salt water; or distil in it powder that resembles medicine corrosive, and place it on the heel upside down with an egg-album [drip] so that it is secured from the cauterization.
If any reason of algarrobate is present and it has become infected with sand [dirt], and you fear cauterization; then leave the heel alone and heal that cauterization with water which will soften that cauterization, and repeat your operation on that again until it is healed, and shape the meat in the heel of this kind.
However, you must know that if any cure for the heel is removed by natural or accidental means, then it will be cured with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations unless you see that the member is suffering from those operations.
Chapter 18.
Of the collection of the sweat in the heel.
Swallow then the red veins that are dry on the heel and do not allow your operation to happen, and leave the heel for a long time of days.
Then it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the heel in which the sweat is present is firm and there is not another illness that is present as a sweat; then collect that sweat.
And it is that you order the patient to rest his head on the pillow; then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle duplicate according to this form:
or two ounces of subtlety in one part according to this form:
Then let those veins be collected with subtle forceps, with subtlety, and abstain from washing that sand for an hour; then let those veins be removed from the heel so that they are dried up by the heel and are scattered.
And beware that you do not wash the heel with the tips of the spatula; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and be firm in your operation so that you do not cut off those veins.
And when you are finished, then distil in the heel with green or bitter medicine so that the sweat is dried up by it.
If water is not available to you then collect all of it within that hour; and then let it be applied to the heel with water which will soften the pain in it, and let it rest for several days so that the pain in it is cured and secured from the cauterization.
Then repeat on it according to the same way until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter 19.
Of reduction of inflammation to the nose.
When you treat inflammation with cauterization or acute medicine as it is preceded in the narration of it and is not cured, then do not render it to dust but take out all the moisture that is in it so that the bone may be discovered; and let it be covered with a poultice.
And then, when the bone is discovered and also in its corruption or blackness, then you use a instrument of which this is the form:
It is called a sharp cap, and it is made of iron, and it is the cap that is used to pierce with a point of lime or to cut with a subtle point (in this case as it is in the following form).
Then place that above the location of the corrupted part of the bone, and turn it between your thumb and fingers; press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is smooth.
Then water is made to dry up some time; and then restore the location with caustic and stiff substances.
Then if the location is consolidated and it is hidden good meat and it is separated from the sinew of the skin and it is not renewed and it does not become infected and it does not happen in it, then you know that it is healed.
If not, then do not render it to dust but reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this way: and if you discover a second bone with iron or acerbic medicine, and after discovering the bone, then take a tribe according to this form:
The length of iron is folded, and its edge is sharp within the extreme end as often as possible.
Then place that above the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; then make your hand move a little from the tribe until it enters all the bone, and that one feels the patient by contact that he has it:
Then restore the location with caustic medicine as if you were drying it up.
Then when the meat does not endure that location, then the matter that makes the parts come together returns to the nose; then water is applied to the patient.
Chapter .xx.
On the reduction of the hernia from the navel.
When the hernia has come away completely and causes no harm or decrease, then remove the patient's clothing, and immediately thereafter, follow with the next step, and pause to apply a cooling liquid to the navel which has been prepared with salt and aloe and oil and collyrium, and immediately afterwards to tighten the plaster over the hernia with powder.
And the manner of the powder is that you take linen cloths made from lions' fur, and each cloth be doubled up into four sheets; and make them of this fur.
Then arrange those sheets one on top of the other according to the quantity that the hernia requires. Then tighten those sheets firmly and securely; then apply the cooling liquid to the navel a second time for its scraping; then remove the sheets and let the patient remain naked all night.
Maybe if, in the meantime, the ligament has become soft, then tighten it tightly.
Then remove the ligature all at once with a single stroke after having let the patient remain naked all night.
And if the hernia has already been reduced, then do so; and if not, then repeat the plastering with the powder and the tightening and the cooling all at once until it is healed.
Chapter .xxi.
On the incision of the hernia in the upper part of the eye.
When the hernia breaks out in the upper part of the eye, and it is large and protuberant, then make an incision with a razor there, and the operation is as follows: you introduce the blade into the root of the eyelid from which the tear duct emerges, and immediately afterwards insert another blade, which has a double-edged blade at one end, in the same way; then let that penetrate and leave the first blade according to its position; then cut the spot of the double blade and pull it back with the blade; then tighten that.
Then remove the blade and place it over the navel, infused with milk of soya, and leave it in place until the thread pulls on the eye.
Then treat the hernia with a remedy that comforts it within so that the plague is healed.
And in some cases, from the entire eyelid, a circle of cloth is applied over the navel with tight pressure; and it should be pierced by a fine needle that enters the base of the hernia, and let the watery pus run out, and lower the navel and enter as far as possible.
Then tighten it until it is healed.
Chapter .xxii.
On the treatment of eye troubles.
This disease, which is called "conjitival" (eye trouble), does not exist; it is the navel that resembles descending water and is not that.
Maybe the manner of the work in it is that you make the navel cut in half and turn it, and immediately take the sixth part of the six eyes (two) and close them so that you cannot see; then let the light shine on them, and the navel should not go down, and do not allow tears to flow, and look at the causes there.
And if it does not go down, you will know that it is water.
Maybe if it is not prepared to descend the disease with water that we have mentioned, then make the navel cut between the muscles and immediately take a fine needle and pierce it at the place where the conjunctiva meets the corneal nerve in the crown (at the edge of the eye), and let the disease be removed.
Then, when it is removed, you distil the navel with water that has been mixed with honey or with water in which you have built fennel and honey.
Then let it be cured with other remedies so that it is healed.
Chapter .xxii.
On the treatment of water that descends from the navel.
We have mentioned the spices for the water in the division and how it agrees to pierce with sound, declaring, then according to health.
Then you will know that it is water that should be made into a half-circle and turned on a flat stone; then take the sixth part of the six eyes (two) and close them so they cannot see; then place the stone on the navel and tighten it.
Then pause near the eyelid of the navel with your left hand, if the water is in the navel; or with your right hand, if the water is on the navel.
Then with your right hand take some almagge, if the navel is left-handed; or with your left hand, if the navel is right-handed.
Then pause the end of the almagge near the crown by the thickness of the eye's white part from the tear duct, and immediately dip it in almagge with power and turn it; then take it with your hand and dip it again.
Then penetrate into the navel's white part and feel that almagge has already reached the eye disease.
Then the measure of the path of almagge to the eye is the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the navel; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal layer.
Then pause almagge in the place where the water is; and then take another one with you, and if the water descends quickly, then treat the navel with that water.
Then pause for a little while; and if the water descends quickly, then you should stop that other one before almagge is removed.
And when it stops and does not go down, then extract almagge easily, and turn it with your hand slowly, and dissolve a little clear salt in gems and wash the navel inside; then pause the navel outside with cloth or stop it or wrap it in rose water infused with milk of soya, and place it in a clean place.
Maybe we are those who have not been born yet; and let us pause on that navel with a three-part meal made from milk of soya.
If you do not obey your almagge to the navel in its hardness  — for it is some of those people whose navel is hard like the wood; then, when you take the needle:
Then pierce that conjunctiva with the needle, and do not stop until you reach the navel; and if it does not stop, then you should draw blood from it.
Then put almagge as we have mentioned.
You should be pleased with this work, prepared for the navel' sleep; and let it not go out during the night; and let no movement occur there.
Then pause in the nature of the water so that its nature is cool; and do not pull the hair from the front or back of all.
Then the plaster should be according to its position by the third day.
Then remove that navel from that dark place and expose the painful sight; then return the plaster on the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to make water in the time of treatment or immediately thereafter, but rather to infuse it. While you are making water for the navel, because the water spreads quickly with a look of contempt.
Maybe if an apoplexy occurs suddenly, then remove the navel on the seventh day, and immediately afterwards, clean it with water that causes an apoplexy.
Then turn him over so he is facing down on his back and pause for a moment above the face of the patient to whom you are treating, as it is kept in place by the hands that hold his feet.
And now go back to the dark room gradually and converse with him about his causes.
And you know that in surgery it is not allowed to have a cold eye, and so turn your gaze sharply toward the operation.
And some have said that it is done in the art of medicine, and one says that fire is made by rubbing together two pieces of wood and then adding a spark, and water is drawn out.
But nevertheless I have not seen in our land the one who has perfected this water, nor is it known from the ancient books, and it is possible that this is new.
These are the forms of magic for those who are on those who do not know about them:
And they have been made from iron or steel, and the tips of those are this triangular subtility, the acute tip thus being the shape.
Chapter .xxiv.
Of the treatment for meat in the nose.
When in the nose various meats are hidden that have caused a condition that is gathered by wind and weight, or it is a polyps that looks like this disease represented by a peal. And of the meat is cancerous flesh, with white skin, and it is that meat of a lion not of white color.
Then in those meats of a lion that are neither fraudulent nor cancerous, cover it with your hand and place it under the sun, and pierce the meat with a sharp knife into those pieces. Then remove that piece from the sides beforehand, and cut it into small pieces with a sharp knife so that you know all the meat is removed; if for any reason the removal can be done easily, then cut that meat into smaller pieces with one of the small instruments. If it is a sore or acid pus, then pause the meat that covers it; or if it is a malicious pus, then cut and cauterize that within which has been cut off sore and all holes have been covered.
Then return to the nose to take the incision with salt and water or vinegar. If the nose is wet and you feel moisture within the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate according to how it is covered, then you know that inside there is no meat but only pus and bones of the nostrils in which there has been no removal.
Then return to the nose to test it with your finger, and taste each piece of meat a little at a time, and place a sharp tool on the tip of the finger or on another cause that can be done easily; cut off one end of the tissue in the nose with a tool.
And when the meat is done cooking, so that its odor is drawn in and enters the nostrils, and it is thrown up on the palate because the sight of this action causes children to vomit at school, which is a good sign for those who want to do it.
Then pause the two ends of the tissue, one end that comes out above the nose and the other that is still inside the nose, and then remove the meat from the nostrils that is on the finger, and cut it into pieces so that you know that the meat is already gone; it is done.
Then remove the tissue, and return to the nose to take the incision of sore a little at a time, and do it for three days or more until the wound is healed completely; cut off all the meat.
Then return to the end of the cause, place a pipe in the nose for drainage over time until it is healed.
If you see that treatment has begun, then use it.
And this is the form of the instrument to cut and clean with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
It is made of silver or iron, which looks like a small open lantern, and it has a sharp point, and the meat looks similar.
And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a tube, and the tube of the instrument to cut and clean is flat and open; hold it in your hand, so that you hold it when you drain oil or water from the suckings and the foul-smelling causes.
Chapter .xxv.
Of the treatment of the nostrils at their ends.
A few drops of oil are placed in the nostrils at their ends, and it is great and prolonged for three days within which time it is seen that treatment begins with the watchful eye.
And through oil that you cover it in the beginning of its appearance, and you will inherit all of it. Then pause over the place or cauterize or apply a burning medicine that is on the spot.
If the incision is delayed until it is great, then consider if it is hard and of white color and of little feeling, then do not touch that piece with iron because it is a cranky apium; because drops of oil are placed on this apium by the great evil that has been done to it.
If the apium is hard and its color is not pale, then when incision can be done on all of it, then remove the meat with a sharp instrument and cure the spot with oil that has begun to heal and apply pressure within which it is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is broken by plague or by resemblance.
You know that when you achieve resolution of continuity in one of these cartilage structures, you have less success with the operation than with others.
Then, when this condition is present in any of them, you should consider if it is a fresh plague with the same name, then adjust the two lips of the plague to the suture, and then return to heal that within which has been healed.
If the lips of the solution for continuity are already separated, and each is healed separately, then you know that they have been cut apart, within which does not cause any pain. Then adjust the two lips to the suture and strengthen them, and spray on them dragon's blood and honey-mustard, and pause over the powder a little of turpentine oil, or another of the consolidative plasters, and leave it alone for two days or three, then remove that plaster and replace it with another one, and you will leave it alone for a few days, and then return to heal that within which has been healed.
If the method of the suture is that you add the solution for continuity or with needles in the same way as you have described in the suture of the belly, or if you add the solution for continuity to the tissue.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips separated inside.
Here is the first sentence of the text:
Then if you cut the lips and separate each of those hard pieces from all parts, and clean the wound with sage tea until it is completely healed, and then wash it thoroughly with water that is made bitter, and clean the area with astringent, then heal it.
Chapter .xxviii.
On cutting into the flesh between the gums.
And if dark spots appear on the flesh between the gums, which cause whiteness in some people, then you should hang that piece of flesh or cut it off and clean out those parts with a needle and thread, and let the blood flow or stop the bleeding.
Then apply sage tea or other astringent or Exfoliant powder to the area.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it again and cauterize it, because the cauterization will not be effective otherwise.
Chapter.xxix.
On the reason for teeth made of iron.
When the surface of the teeth, between the gums and in the threads, is rough, sharp, and some spots are dark and others are yellow or green, then the gums rot and the teeth fall out.
Then if you cut the meat between your teeth and place the top of the foot in the space below, and grind the teeth where those spots appear, which resemble sand, then the blackness and yellowness and other spots will disappear because they are not caused by anything that grinds them.
Then if that is the reason for those spots at the beginning of hair growth, then that is right; and if not, then you should repeat the process on another day or a second or third time until you arrive at the final statement concerning what you want to say.
And you should know that teeth require different shapes and forms of tools according to how they are prepared for your operation. And for this reason, the blade with which the tooth is cut from the gum is different from the blade used to cut between the teeth according to other forms, and those forms of blades should be prepared, which you will see soon enough:
Chapter.xxx.
Root removal of teeth.
Then if you cure the tooth from its root, taking care not to wait too long for the complete eradication of it, because it is a sublimated substance and an excuse in the eradication of the root.
And if the meat is forced out, then you should be certain which tooth hurts, because the pain of the root may deceive you and make you think that it is in a healthy tooth, and you will eradicate that one, and the pain will not stop until the root itself is eradicated, for we have seen this happen through an operation on the teeth of the lower jaw.
Then you should be certain which tooth hurts, and you know that well, then if you scrape on the path of the tooth with a blade where there is no benefit, until it is dissolved from the gum at the beginning, and then cut it with tiny scissors or a sharp fork little by little until it is cut off.
And then place a strong tenaculum firmly on the bottom of the teeth that you can pull without hurting yourself, and place the top of the foot between those teeth that hurt you less, and take hold of the tooth with a firm grip according to how it should not break, nor should the root hurt you.
And if it is not root-get (i.e., the tooth has come loose), then take one of those instruments, and insert it carefully from all sides with ease and try to remove it easily as if it were being pulled out at the beginning.
But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you should wrap that cloth tightly around it and tighten it with a string at the end of a small stick so that it does not break in your hand when you tighten it.
Then if you open it exceptionally by cutting into the gum all around, and guard your strength so that you do not break it and cause a rupture in it, and return to the foot for the evil that is less than the first pain of it.
And be careful not to make a mess of it like some careless and audacious barbers have done at the end of their shaving, for we have witnessed that with those roots removed completely, or some of them, or if you extract one with some bones from the mandible in this way, with those ugly spots we have seen.
Then the eradication of it should be washed with a strong cauterizer or astringent solution.
And if there is blood from the tooth, as it often happens with those spots, then pour a small amount of water on it and sprinkle it with salt, or cauterize it.
The shape of the tweezers and forceps should be small and sharp at the end, with a long handle, and a short grip, so that they do not bend when you work with them.
They should be like this, sometimes with large grips, so that when you start using them they do not bend, they are sharp tips.
They are made of iron from India, with a right-hand grip, and at the end are teeth like those of an owl's beak which is sharp and pointed, and some of these ends are the shape of a bird's beak, which is a handle, and they are very strong in their grip.
Chapter.xxxi.
On the eradication of teeth and the removal of bones from the mandible.
When you should eradicate a tooth that is being pulled out for any reason, then if the place is moistened with a cold liquid for a day or two until it softens; and then place a tenaculum firmly on each side of the location with a blade, and place a pair of forceps at the end of one of them, like an owl's beak, which is a handle, the shape of the tweezers:
Their ends are sharp from inside, with five or six teeth, and they are made of iron or metal.
And if you do not obey your instructions with these tweezers or forceps, then cut off the root and dig out the instrument which has the name of an awl, so is a small hammer whose shape is as follows:
And be of a small thick end of tar, that it not be enveloped by it so that it does not break.
So that if for this the root is pierced, it is good; and if not, help me with these other instruments whose are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is of triangular end in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be of triangular and very thin end.
And you are helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form to follow: And with other instruments that will be needed in sharpening of teeth; because quickly it is done with this instrument which is assembled of one large, and this is the form:
of the triangular end bent or short, which is some thickness, and that it not be enveloped by it so that it does not break.
And you know that the instruments of the teeth are similar to the other instruments.
Might the artisans skilled and subtle in art, invent for themselves according to what it means to them that operation and various illnesses; because are of the illnesses to which the ancient did not say or stopped their own instrument, by the shapes of different species.
If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken, then let it be cleansed on that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and of the forceps which we have spoken about the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help me with gestures of which this is the form:
And be in some small thickness little by little, and is stretched or held to the mouth so that it does not escape or flee completely that the bone of all is pierced; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for it.
If in the bone is a small hole, then let that bone be cut from that hole and from its blackness, and cure that within it is healed.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the treatment of prominent diseases compared to other diseases.
When the teeth are prominent not following their natural course by those the form is short, and more so when they extend to the gums, and more so to the venerable vulvas; therefore consider that if a tooth is nothing attached to another tooth, and it is not possible to cut it with a saw or to rub it with a file, then pull it out; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to the morra of a pig, and is made of iron of India of triangular end in which there is some thickness.
And be your incision with which you cut that tooth in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not attached to any other tooth.
And if a prominent tooth has spread to a file, then file that tooth with a file of iron of India of which this is the form:
And all of it is made of iron of India and the margin only; and that be very small points made with a file on it, as needles, making the tooth be filed little by little in two days with ease, so that no other tooth becomes attached to it, and it breaks. And then line up that tooth, and cut it with a scalpel.
And if a tooth is broken in which one part is sharp and you are cutting it with the tongue, then consider that you rub out the sharpness of that fraction so that the tongue does not scrape nor the word corrupt.
Chapter.xxxiii.
Of restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
When an accident happens to the teeth by striking or hitting, and the patient cannot be restrained more than that it bleeds, and you have treated that with medicinal stinging, and your treatment has not been successful, then for those teeth that are attached to gold wire and not to silver wire, because silver changes color and must be filed with a file in two days, whereas gold does not change color.
And be the wire in such subtility and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between teeth; and the shape of the cut is that you take the wire and double it between two sound teeth, and then let it grow with two twists of the wire between two broken teeth, or if one or both are missing, until the thread reaches the sound tooth on the other side. And then repeat the treatment within the fraction of which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not broken.
And be your tightening with which you tighten the wire so that the roots of the teeth do not escape.
And then you cut off the excess tips of the wire with scissors or tweezers, and add them in any place with gestures, and hide those between the sound tooth and the broken tooth, so that it does not damage the tongue. And then let that tooth rest with a string.
If it is broken or shattered, strengthen it or them with another wire in such a way in all the time.
This is the shape of teeth and the figure of the cutting of two sound teeth and two broken teeth, thus tied:
And when one tooth or two return to their place in the place of each in their locations, and they are restored thus with a string tied, and they remain.
It is not done except by skilled and wise artisans.
Some teeth are apt for some cause of the bones of the cow, and it is done from them as the form of a tooth, and is placed in its place in which the tooth fails, and it is strengthened thus with what we have said, and remain and serve to that for a long time.
Chapter.xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligature which is seen in the tongue and prohibits speaking.
This ligament which leaves the tongue some times or is natural to the person who does not have it, or happens by accident due to a plague which has already been consolidated.
The operation in it is that you work the mouth of the patient, and its tongue exists in the neck; and it lifts up the tongue, and then cut the ligament with a sharp scalpel according to the thickness so that the tongue does not feel its edge.
If in that is some hardness or pain, and it has been standing for consolidation of disease, then you cut it once and cut it according to the thickness so that you do not break the ligament and dissolve the nodule.
And guard that there is not made a crack in the bone of the meat, and you cut here flesh with a sharp knife and avoid flowing blood.
And then wash the trace of the incision with clear water or with salt water or with clean water; and then let it rest away from the tongue; so is made the which leaves the tongue in any new way that it does not become consolidated again.
If an accident of blood happens, place over the place a tri-edged knife; if the blood runs, then sterilize the place with a sterilizing liquid which is suitable for this work and pour it. And that tooth is cured with other causes so that it is healed.
Chapter.xxxv.
Of the extraction of a tongue.
Some times happens by accident leaving the tongue swollen, resembling a small one, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and it is strong that is made to fit into the mouth.
And the operation on him is that you make an incision in the patient’s groin 60 degrees from the sun, and examine the abscess.
And if you see that it is black or brown in color, which the patient does not feel, do not touch it because it is hard.
And if it is white in color, which means moisture, then you put tar on it and cut it with a fine knife, cutting through all of it; and if blood comes out during the operation, stop for three days, unless it is infectious, until the wound heals over.
Then continue with your work until you have removed all of it, cleaning it with vinegar and salt; and cure that with the other treatment using water until it is healed over.
Chapter .xxvi.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and on those that are nothing but pus and on other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, there are three types of glandular structures that can develop: one at the base of the testicle (called a "spermatic cord"), one at the inguinal region (called an "inguinal lymph node"), and one at the surface of the skin (called a "lymphatic duct"). If these do not respond to treatment with tar and water, they are called "two ears" because they resemble ears; if they are nothing but pus, they are called "nothing but water"; and if there are other abscesses, describe them.
And if it is of a red color and the swelling is large, do not touch that part with tar in order to avoid spreading the infection; let it mature, and then either you will remove it or someone else will cut it off.
And if it is of a white color, which means it is moist, that one is to be cut and examined.
And the operation on him is that you consider, before your operation, whether he has already recovered from his abscess completely or whether it has diminished in any way; and then place the patient's groin 60 degrees from the sun, with his head between his knees, and make an incision in the mouth of the groin, and the servants take hold of his hands on either side of the head, holding a noble instrument by which this is the form:
It should be made of silver or iron, and it should be sharp with an edge.
Then when you press on the patient' and the abscess is shown to you, place your finger on it, hold tar on it, and cut it in all directions as much as you can. Or if any water comes out when you press, and then cut that with the instrument whose form is this:
Or if any water comes out when you press, and then cut that with the instrument whose form is this: it is assembled with forceps, however, the extremities of it are curly, so that the orifice of each one is in the end of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron inlaid with gold.
If this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut it with a scalpel, whose form is this: It should be sharp on one side but not sharp on the other.
And after you have made one incision, make the other according to this method of cutting, and then wash the groin with water.
If there is a flow of blood, wash the water with an infusion of sorrel or apple leaves or something similar to stop the flow of blood, and then cure that until it is healed over.
Some people also have abscesses in the groin that are not these two ears, and cut those according to what I said above in the description of the cutting of two incisions.
This is also a case of an abscess in the groin that has been described above as being of a reddish color and with little sensation; the patient had already stopped eating and drinking, and she was close to death if this continued for another day or two.
The abscess had become so large that it had broken out in two places.
Then I hid myself in a bush, and I took one of the tar-balls, and threw it at him; a great quantity fell out, and then I cut that one which was on the other side, and then I hid the tongue of the patient, and then I held the tar-ball against the mouth of the patient.
Then I cut away a great part of it, and there was little blood. Then I took off all of the groin area from that woman, and then she began to drink water, and then I gave her food, so I did not stop cutting those abscesses for a long time, and another abscess developed in place of it, which I cut until it was healed over.
Then I took off his groin and cauterized it, then walked around, and I did not know what to do about him because God was with me.
Chapter .xxvii.
On the treatment of hives when they are pustular.
When there is catarrh on the hives and it is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is thick and round, then it is called a  "bub".
If it is cured with the water that we have described in the division, and if your treatment does not help, and if the abscess has become hard and is small, then you should cut that one which is round; and if it is long, and if there is blood, which is reddish or black in color, and if it does not cause him great pain, then you should take care when cutting it because it may be dangerous.
And when you see that second part of his whiteness and length, that you cut the tongue of the patient with an instrument whose form is this: and then hold tar on it, and cut it with one of two instruments which I have described in the cutting of two incisions.
If you do not cut that one but rather leave it on the natural term of its growth, then it will cause him much pain because it will grow too large.
Then continue with the cutting, using the water that we have described in the cutting of two incisions, and cure that until it is healed over.
If the patient was afraid of being cut, be careful when performing the cauterization because it should only be done with sharp water; and this is how you perform the cauterization: fill an instrument whose form is this: with sharp water.
Keep the end of the instrument in the medicine and pause it on the uvula, and the patient will move his tongue so that the saliva or mucus from the mouth is drawn into the instrument's cavity, so that there is no chance of a cause developing in the groin area because of any medicine escaping through the opening.
Then hold your hand over the medicine, and squeeze that onto the uvula for a half-hour before swallowing it, so that it does not become dark and bitter because of the taste of the medicine.
And if you wish, you may wrap that end of the ray around the instrument's edge and submerge it in the medicine, and push the ray into a tube; so that the ray stays on the tube, and then let it dry for three or four days.
And if you are afraid that the medicine may need to be repeated, repeat that, and the cauterization is washed in the circuit of the grape with the hidden border, and it is boiled with the water of the rinse, and is cured outside the embrocation, and is used within the gums that are healed.
This kind of cure is put on more safely than cutting and less out of fear.
Some are treated with water which is gentler than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with sub-smoking in this way: take chamomile, hyssop, oregano, rudbeckia, Arabic sycamus, mint, and similar herbs to those, and put them all together into a pot, and let them soak in vinegar; and the pot be nicely boiled, and placed at the patient's side with a hole on top of it, through which is placed an iron tool according to this method; let it be made of silver or iron.
And the end is inserted into the patient's mouth in such a way that the steam reaches the uvula over the margin, so that the uvula is very dim.
And repeat on those spots again until they are dry, and be sure not to carry out this cure at the arrival of aphthae, because it would fit too much in the apthma, and do not let water come out, but rather the declaration of the apthma from the caut.
Maybe if you don't have this tool with you, then take a cane and cut off the end of it, so that the patient' mouth is closed, because the hole in the cane will prevent the steam from burning the mouth.
This cure is good for healing.
Chapter .xxxviii.
Of extraction of thorns and of the water that adheres to the foot and of other causes.
Spots on the foot or thorns or any other cause.
And then extract the water that is evident from it, above which the sight falls, because you press your tongue on the tool in front of the sun, so that the water declared from it is put on your tongue.
And the water that does not appear in your sight on the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach, because it brings about a loose motion that causes the foot to be removed by vomiting; or if he drinks a fish bone or a radish leaf or a piece of dry bread; or take a dry sponge of sea-leek, and wet it well with wine, and put it on the patient' mouth, and make him swallow it, because when it reaches the place where thorns are attached and are to be extracted, then it is loose. And if you want to take a snake and wet it well with wine, and put it on the patient' mouth, and make him swallow it, because when it reaches the place where thorns are attached and are to be extracted, then it is swallowed; or if you want to take a pig and give him a drink of wine, and let him pass water, and collect what comes out from his arse;
Maybe if you don' do the above things that I have said, then use an iron tool according to this form:
And it is made a little thicker than a small one, and in the end of it there is a cavity that you put into the patient' mouth with ease.
And let him raise his head high, and be careful not to touch his jaw with his teeth, so that the water falls on him or catches his teeth or makes him cough, or makes him spit it out.
Maybe if the patient takes it, he will be better, because of his knowledge of where the cause is attached and catches in the hole, and pull his hand on the tool with him, all according to the quantity that is prepared for him so that he does not cough up.
Chapter .xxix.
Of extraction of blood thorns attached to the foot.
When the blood is treated with water that we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer with you, consider in the foot of the patient at the sun, because you have moved your tongue on the tool which I have told you to take.
Then if you want to extract the blood, do it with a small knife or with gentle movements smoothly.
And if you don' want to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and insert it into the foot of the patient, and put a hot iron in the concave part of the tube, and let water out as many times as the blood is dead and stops flowing from the foot) all day long.
And then take a bucket full of lukewarm water, and wash the mouth with it, and not swallow any food or drink water for an hour after that because the blood will taste water soon.
Maybe if it is not cough up with water that I have told you, then sub-fumigate the patient with cumin or assafetida using the tool which I have told you in the sub-fumigating of the uvula.
Make water, so in both cases.
And this is another way of operating in sub-fumigating water, it is that you take a bucket with which the carbon is lit and the bucket is covered with a blanket on whose side there is a hole, through which the tool's end is placed; then make the sub-fumigation burn; and place the patient' mouth on the tool's end, and close his mouth so that the sub-fumigation does not cough up until you know that the sub-fumigation is reaching the blood, because the blood will cough up soon.
And if you don' hear it, then repeat the sub-fumigating several times, and prevent the patient from drinking water, and eat salty foods and fruits, and do not drink water again, and as necessary that in this regime it is cough up.
And this is the shape of the tool which I have told you to extract blood from the foot when it is seen; and it is similar to tweezers sometimes, but because it is in its curve: which is put on the foot, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is sharp, because when it grasps any cause, that does not let go.
Chapter.X.
In the sum of the speech in the appearance of apthae and in dissection of them.
Apthae are special spots, in different ways, according to their appearance, from each one of these books.
And they are diverse in perforation and dissection of them in two ways, the first one is for the kind of apthae themselves; and the second is because of their moisture.
And the second way is because of the places where they happen to the body, because the apthae in the head is different from the one in the back; and the apthae in the flesh are different from the ones in the joints; and each one has its treatment.
And some apthae are those which are not pierced, but rather their maturation in those or completion of them.
And some apthae are those which are crossed when they are in the joints, and they are not matured according to their completion, then such apthae as are near the joints because the appearance of an apthae when it is near a joint, the person's being prolonged in that is prolonged within its circuit, and the strong corruption of the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it causes pain in that member; or if the apthae is near a main member, and if you delay perforating it, then it will not be cured; or if you pierce it when it is behind, therefore it cannot reach its target and be elongated to the parts at the back of the hip, and it becomes a fistula, or if it is made in the term of that joint and does not heal. May's cover that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and so it is when it is mature.
And you know that it is mature when there is a cessation of the pain and fever, and a decrease in the rash and pulse, and the尖头 of the abscess, and other signs.
And when you know that the perforation should take place in the place pus of the abscess and pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And the perforation should be done at any time during the life of the body or the course, if the abscesses are in the joints of the limbs or in the feet, and in places where there are ligaments, nerves and arteries; and finally, everywhere that is not reflected; for in those that are reflected, use the perforation according to the member.
May's when the abscess is in a carnose place, let it be better that you leave the perforation of it until such time as it is certain that its digestion has been completed, for what I have said; indeed, if you should open this from before, it prolongs the course of the poison and the stench, and hardens the lips and depth of it.
May's also abscesses should be perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or the course of the body that is necessary, or according to which part of it digests.
And when you administer a small perforation, and in the large abscesses make a wide or several cuts according to the variation of their size.
And of the abscesses in which you know that it is necessary to cut and cut them out completely, then do so when they have already stopped and are cold; indeed, what happens in wounds of different kinds and in boils.
And of those that are not cut into sections of three angles; and of those in which it is cut with a figure of an oak leaf, and of the abscesses of the angles.
And of them are administered round sections and lunar sections, and similar ones to these.
May' 's when you have the lions that are superficial, let it be that you should pierce it with a superficial piercing, or flat only.
And when the abscess is thick and has already collected some pus, then pierce it and do not cauterize that you remove all the poison at that time; taking out a little at a time, and on another day take out a bigger one, and on another day make small cuts in it until it is cured.
And if the patient is of a virile nature or a female, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit that moves the veins is resolved to leave the exit of the pus, and hardens the patient, then close it up.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you administer the poultices to these abscesses, consider that if the plague of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then you administer them with a liquid poultice; but if the abscess is large, and the cuts in the piercing are narrow, let it be that you pause a moment so that they mix together.
And if in the abscess is cut a part of the cord or has concave that which is in the circuit, then let it be that you compress them with an old cloth or a thin piece of cloth, so when you have cleaned it, wet it; and strengthen that inside on the third day; and continue to do so until it is cured and all the poison is removed.
May'  's if you see a flow of blood in the hour that your operation is taking place, then you administer warm water and vinegar to which you add a piece of cloth, and pause it over the spot where the flux of blood is flowing.
May'  's if the flow of blood persists, then let it be that you administer medicine and cure, and make the powders mentioned in these places of our book and division.
May'   's if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of cold nerves, then let it be that you put powder of wine or oil of vitriol, and pause those on the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are carnose, then let it be that you pause powder of wine or oil mixed with water or wine and oil, and all this should be done on the third day, as I have said; and when you have removed the abscess, let it be that you compress it with a cloth soaked in cold water, so that it heals quickly.
And thus is what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction that I have already said, every abscess has a way of being cured by itself.
Chapter xli.
Of the Section of Abscesses that Come in the Head of the Arm.
In the head of the arm are small abscesses, and of various kinds; some contain fat that is solid, and others contain pus.
And of them are blisters, and of those are filled with liquid similar to lemon juice. And of those that contain liquid similar to blood, and similar to them; and of those that are cloudy, dry.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those that are not painful, do not cause any pain to the body.
And the operation in sections of them is that you apply them to an instrument the shape of which you will find below, which is called a tweezers, so that you know that it contains.
For if the liquid that they contain is water, then cut them with a section according to its length by a superficial section according to this shape:
And start in the section of line B inside the line G. Since the moisture has been removed, then scrub that liquid off with a cloth, and do not leave any cause for concern; for three clear signs return, if it remains from that cause.
And dip it in Egyptian ointment if there is any, or salt water; and fill it with liquid to the bottom, and leave it inside for another day, for with water it wears away all that is under that film.
And repeat that dip to the ointment second and third time if it needs it, leaving it for a while, so that you are sure that there is no cause for that film; then heal the plague with ointment inside until it is cured.
And if the abscess contains fat, then cut it according to this shape: I cut it into a form of a crotch, and insert my fingers between the two lips of the incision, then I pull it all the way out from the beginning, and strain my strength to remove the tunic which is wrapped around it.
If your bowels are causing difficulty, then do what I have told you first.
And apparently you have told me first that if your bowels are causing difficulty, then make the incision and cure as I said to you; and an incision over a lap of incision is lighter, because it is little blood and little moisture.
And some times there are those of these laps which are in the head and from those there are men who have not moisture at all; that is the cause because I have cut on one of these laps in the head of an old woman, and I have hit it so hard that it has become black, and if to anyone it had struck, it would have infected him.
But in other laps which are in the head this chapter is not about it, so if these laps that come to the heads of children and their roots of the ears, but the section of all of them should be a superficial section.
And pause the piercing of those from the beginning which are lower down for it to be relieved the body of the patient in the lower parts.
Then approach cure with water that is suitable for healing.
Chapter.
Of the section of scrofulas which happen in the neck.
There are visible laps which come in the neck and in the shoulders and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those which happen in the neck, and so those which are created between them, and all of the scrofulas of these are wrapped in their own tunic, and then as I have told you first.
The spices of these scrofulas are visible, because some are filled with moisture, and some are evil which do not respond to cure.
Therefore in that which you have seen with good disposition in the Treatment, of which the color of the water which is revealed is similar to the color of the grape, and it is pleasant throughout, and does not adhere to the nerves of the neck, or to the veins, nor is it heavy, so that you cut it with a superficial section from the beginning to the end of the body part on the line of G. within the line of B., and remove it little by little from the two lips of the incision, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that it is not cut into a vein or a nerve.
And the blade should not be sharp that it does not hurt you in a section or makes the patient uncomfortable, and that you do not cut into a vein or an artery, because if you cut a vein or an artery, then you stop your operation, therefore pause in the plague of vinegar or other powders which stop blood flow, and release the plasma, and leave it until it is relieved by its own nature, and becomes softened and starts to rot. When the blood is separated.
Then returns to your operation until you complete it.
And then ask the following question if there is a reason for these small scrofulas, therefore cut those and clean those.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula from its root. Before you leave, cut that with a sharp knife and release it little by little until it falls down by itself.
Then fill the plague with young wine which you have already mixed with Egyptian ink, and then cure that.
And if you cut the scrofula whole, then you should adjust the two lips of the plague and leave it little by little until there is no excess.
But if you think that there is excess because of the size of the scrofula, then cut the root of that, and then remove it with thread and water which is said.
And those scrofulas which contain moisture, pierce that with a superficial section here where the location of maturation of the scrofula appears to you, and pause the piercing of those which come to the lower parts of the body, as I have told you.
And then administer the piercing, which is similar to ink and similar to those, so that it corrodes the roman blood of corruption. And then, when you see that the plague is already cleaned, then you cure that with ink of new generation until it is healed.
Chapter.
Of the section of a scrofula which happens in the head.
They said that this section is not about the epileptic, and I did not see anyone in our land who had done that.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men there are some things, because the extraction of the epileptic should not be done suddenly, because it is not right for all veins and the main one of the body to be stopped.
But in those who have laps which are in the mouth or in two ears, and when the malady is not in the head, then avoid the section of the epileptic, because it is caused by piercing.
Then when we want to do this, let us make the section of the epileptic three circles which are between the circles of the epileptic, or four with a small section per length, so that the section is in a line, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for the section, because it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood from him run through it.
And if the medicine is little, then extend the hair of the head to one ounce, and then cut the hair with a sharp blade until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if there is any reason for it.
And then cut it according to what I have told you first; and it is shown on the section of the canal by the flame which comes from that, and because it is not broken by the fire, but is separated by water.
And leave the plague open for a while.
Then when the hour is renewed in which the piercing is convenient, add two lips to the hair of the plague, and cut it single, because it is cartilage.
And then administer medicines that can heal the flesh so that it may be healed.
And Albucasis said that the summary of the sermon which we have told you is not other than what you see from those scrofulas has already happened to the head of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and his breath is stopped, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through that place for a while, and be saved from death.
And I command that the plague be left open until the evil of the malady is destroyed by three days; and then, after those days, I will command to cut the plague in this way, and cure that which needs to be cured.
And I have seen with my own eyes that a servant holds a knife and cuts it into the head of the patient and cuts a piece from the root of the nose, and I was called to cure him, and then I heard the moaning of the patient, and discovered the plague and stopped the blood which was flowing from it.
Therefore I confessed to her that she had not inscribed any veins or sutures, and the wind came out from the wound, and I healed it within so that it was cured.
And did not happen to the servant but she was sore in her voice, and after a few days I returned to the improvement of her dispositions.
Then tell me that there is no danger in the section of the epileptic fit.
Chapter .XLI.
Of section on apoplexy which happens in the belly later, and is called hernia of the stomach.
This apoplexy named hernia of the stomach is a great one according to the color of the body, and it happens more in women.
And it is according to two ways, because it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural it does not arise to heal.
And the accidental is according to two ways, because one is similar to nodules of fat, and another is similar to apoplexy which is made by an artery's knot, and in that there is danger. And do not say that one should make a presumption on him with iron unless it is small. And you shall examine that and investigate that with care, and if it seems to you like nodules of fat, and is not suspended on any of the veins, then you shall cut that out carefully with a scalpel, and extract it with water from the skin and the membrane; and if not, then examine all its body, and cure the place with water that can heal within so that it is cured.
Chapter .XLVI.
Of section of nodules of fat.
The nodules have such species, and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And do not forget to note that difference between a nodule and an exiture with a doubt.
Therefore I say that in exiture there is a degree and fever and violent pains within so that it is calmed by the ebullience of the superfluity; and it is completed by putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But in a nodule there is no degree or fever or pain, and it counts that it puts the lion on top of it which is its own leather.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is with a lump, and it is made like this with water, whether great or small, and there are two species because it contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are varied, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you begin the cure of a nodule, you shall examine that and investigate it with care using an instrument which is called an introducer, according to how its form appears in the chapter which comes after this one.
And it is a way of inquiring into apoplexes and all nodules, that you shall take this instrument and introduce it into the place which seems wetter in the apoplexy, and you shall stir the threads with care within so that you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
And finally, according to the measure of the size of the apoplexy, you shall remove the introducer and consider that water which is present in its trace.
And if the moisture is lost by running, whatever color it may be, then you shall cut it on a superficial section according to what I have said in other apoplexes.
And if there is no moisture in the trace of the introducer, you shall know that it is fat.
And dry on it at section not having a form of crust according to this form: As I have taught you, and suspend that with nails on it, and scrape the skin from all parts with ease, and preserve the fat or skin, if you can, on that, and extract that sainty to the nodule.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sainty, and there are visible veins in it, then you shall extract them with needles within so that they do not break, and you shall take that sainty which is inside of it.
Because if it causes a rupture, whether little or much, the nodule returns according to the measure of it.
And if you think that a small part of it ruptures, then you shall complete the plague with some sharp corrosive dust and press it firmly, and pause over that which causes an epileptic fit, and heal it by another healing within so that it is healed.
And if it is a great nodule, then you shall cut its two sides with a knife and heal it with water which enters into it.
But if there is a pulsatile vein going to the other side, or not-pulsatile, then you shall cut and patch up the place with vinegar, and let it stand for two or three days within so that it can heal the plague and the ebullience of salt water returns; and afterwards, return to cutting that which is broken from the nodule.
Chapter .XLVI.
Of the forms of the necessary instruments for section and perforation.
The three species of introducers, which one is large, and another is medium-sized, and the third is small.
The form of the large introducer is this:
The form of the small introducer is this:
If you have any iron, or if it is sharp at its ends, or if the edges are curved downward, then introduce the instrument into the apoplexes with care.
And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are not named otherwise, and one of them is called a brier.
The three species are, because one is large, another is medium-sized, and the third is small.
The form of a large experiment, its appearance:
The form of a medium-sized experiment, its appearance:
The form of a small experiment, its appearance:
It is convenient that they are for apoplexes and exitions and fistulas and buboes because some of them are of the bones, and others are causes.
And they are curved, and round, and sharp, with large needles which are sewed up together, and they are made of lemon essence, or of vinegar, or of iron, or of silver, and the rest are done with lemon essence.
The black-color experiments are also opened by those which the concavity of them reflects, which are reflected in its light due to their reflection.
The three species are also long or short, and of the others medium-sized, and small, according to the measure of the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Form of a large experiment made of lead:
Form of a medium-sized experiment made of lead:
Form of a small experiment made of lead:
The forms of the nails are of varied species, because some of them are simple, and have only one curve, and there are three species: large, small, and medium-sized.
And they are also nails with a head, and there are three species.
And those are also nails having two curves, and there are three species.
And they are also nails having three curves, and there are three species.
All of them are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple nail, its appearance:
Form a big lump of lead, having two curves: Form a small lump of lead with two curves: Form a little lump of lead with two curves:
Form a big lump of lead with three curves:
Form a small lump of lead with three curves:
And these are the shapes of scalpel with which you scrape and cut nodules and warts; there are three kinds, one large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of a medium scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The ends of these are sharp and the other ends are not, they are not stopped in such a way, but so that it is done smoothly during the scraping of nodules; for this reason, to heal the patient and bring peace quickly after the incisions of veins or nerves, and for this reason, after the scraping of the wart, a little bit of cauterization should be done.
And these are the forms of almug or oil, and they are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see here.
When it is burned and appears like the rays to which it gives alcohol.
And it is on one side punctured with hidden spice and in the other part divided into portions inside and out, as you want, thus you use it.
The forms of spatula, which are wrapped between the thighs to pierce warts; they do not feel the pains, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. These are the shapes of those:
The forms of wind chimes, with which you cut off the flow of blood; and they are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of lead:
When it is burned and appears like the rays of the sun, round and long, and subtle.
And these are the kinds of wind chimes that you have: large, medium and small, so that in their cutting off the flow of blood quickly, and when first used it is not medicine.
However, do not use these to cut off blood throughout the body, but only in flesh areas; for example, in the legs and thighs, in the armpits, chest, breasts, stomach, and ribs, and on the skin of the arms, as well as the skin of the legs.
And some instruments are small in size and look like scalpel; for these reasons, blood is cut off when it is burned by bloodletting or incision of a vein or artery.
Some instruments are made round according to this form:
Chapter xliv.
Of the treatment of men's breasts, which are made up of women.
Some instruments are inflated breasts of men because they give a good sleep when they have started to peel off; and the breasts are inflated, and the breasts of women are assembled, and Roman appendicitis, large.
And if you ask for it, I will cut off those with lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then completely scrape out the scrofulus; and I will fill the plague of infected medicine, and I will join the two lips of the plague with sutures, and heal it within.
If the breast declines and splits into two parts, and it is softened by its size; then join it with two sections resembling the moon, each containing another, and joining them together at their ends, so that the major section contains the minor one according to this form, from line B to line G. And then completely scrape out the scrofulus, and cut off the nipple into two pieces on either side; join them together with sutures, and heal it; and give what is necessary for the cure within, joining it with sutures and powder.
And if you do not like the incision of what I have said above because it disturbs the patient and because of the flow of blood; then I will tell you that you fill the plague with infected medicine by immersing it in corrosive water, and let it sit for a while, and then cut off the part that is corroded by it, which is like the rust of iron; and heal that part.
Chapter xlviii.
Of the piercing of warts that come from below the knee-tickle.
These warts that come from below the knee-tickle are of three kinds: scrofulus, chronic disease, and those who have a pimple.
And of those which contain moisture; and those which contain moisture, are cut off according to this lunar section shape: from line G to line B. And when all the fluid has been evacuated out, then I will tell you what is needed for the cure; on the next day, join it with sutures and let it rest.
And when the crotch is made and left to rest in the water that is convenient for him; and heal it within.
And if the wart of the node is, and of the scrofulus; then you cut off those above this shape, as I have said in the section about scrofulus.
And if the plague is spread out like a wound that needs sutures; then administer it according to what I have said above.
Chapter xlix.
Of the piercing of warts which occur in an artery or vein.
When an artery is broken and the knot is consolidated which is on it, then you see warts that appear due to the inflammation and wart being from the artery or vein; for when a wart appears by bloodletting with a needle, you hear a hissing sound.
And the one which is in a vein is round on the outside of the body.
And the section of this wart is a mistake, and mostly on the part which is left-handed, and on the armpits, neck, and chest; and it is large, so that its treatment with iron may be avoided, and what is in the extremities, or at the top, is to be avoided.
And if the wart occurs due to inflammation of the artery orifice; then you cut off the knot in the long section, and then join it with nails, and cut off that part near the artery, and free it from the skin.
And then join it with a needle and that needle enters into the other one; and tighten the artery at two places, causing your attention to turn towards the two arteries in the temples.
And then I will strike at the spot between the two limbs within which causes blood to come out completely, and dissolve the wart.
And then I will administer a cure which generates poison within, and let the limbs fall; and heal it with water that is convenient for him within.
And if it is a wart due to vein section; then you hold your hand close to where the wart has been cut off with your hand, and let that needle enter; and may it be a double thread within which you extract one from the other one, and join the wart with two limbs according to what I have said above.
Maybe you fear that the thread will break; then insert the needle into that person's flesh, do not cut through the blisters first, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then dry the blisters in their place until there is no moisture on them; then cut off the excess of the thread, and let it hang from that person's body.
And place over them the palm of your hand that you have wet with oil and vinegar, and administer the cure that is done with hot water and salt inside until it heals.
Do not cut off the blisters that happen due to nerve twist.
Do not cut off blisters that form in the skin due to pressure or injury; nor do so because of excess work, and by accident too.
And it is done to that person in the places of the helpers or of the head, or in any place where joints are inflamed.
And it is a severe blister; and its color is similar to that of the other parts of the body, and if it is hot and violent, it sends the patient into a kind of stupor.
And it is not a blister that forms on the front of the body, and for this reason the thread remains hanging, and it inflames the whole body, and does not affect the parts in front or behind.
Thus, from those that are at the joints, do not cover them so that they do not get wet because it would bring about the opposite result; for strong heat would be produced.
Maybe those who are on the head or forehead should have their threads cut with a blade. Maybe if it is a small blister, then you should put it in the folds and cut off the hair from the root.
And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a string, and cut off the hair from that person, and then bind it up; adjust the wound with stitches, and heal it inside until it heals.
Here is the last line of text:
Of the blister that happens from the mouth to the belly.
And also, when there are some small spots on the belly of those people and other parts of their bodies, which resemble mushrooms in appearance; where the hair is thin and the face round; and also, when the body is swollen and puffy.
And I have also seen one; and in that person's belly were two spots that resembled small mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, whose hair is fine.
And the lips of these people were red and swollen, and moisture ran from them constantly.
So you cut off those spots and sewed up the one on the foot with eighteen needles. And the other had one needle.
And the operation of cutting them is that you consider whether the patient' body is wet, and the color of the wound is white, moist, with fine hair; then insert a sharp blade into it, and let it be in your presence, for small spots devoured by the wound should be expelled through the cut; and if you see blood, cauterize that spot.
And if the patient is a little scared or afraid, do not cut them with iron; but rather take fresh lead and tighten that person' wrist in the manner that has been described; and let it be so for two days.
Then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; so, do not cut off a large piece of the lead because it will fall off by itself and cause pain.
Maybe if the lead is of thick hair, then in cutting it there is no cause for fear or worry; and mostly so in that which is in the belly.
Maybe you could cut off most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then heal the wound inside so that the disease is cured.
And be careful not to cut off a piece of lead that has a dark color, or is of little feeling, and does not seem right; for such is cancer.
And I came back to my memory of the old man.
Here is the last line of text:
Of cure for umbilical hernias.
Umbilical hernia is caused by some motas; or by a fissure of the navel that hangs down over the belly, and has the intestine or hernia hanging out according to whether it breaks forward or back; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery according to whether it flows in front or back; or by constriction of wind blowing out.
Maybe if it is because of a break in the navel and the intestine comes out, then the color of the blister is similar to that of the body; and there is much pain, and it appears in different places. Maybe if it is because the hernia comes out, then the location of that person with regard to where we have described is different, and many times; and when you press that person' side with your hand, it goes back in, and there is a lot of pain on the other side; and it is very hot inside, and there is much violent work.
Maybe if it is because of moisture, then it burns and does not go back in when you press it with your hand, and it is neither constricted nor hidden.
Maybe if it is because of blood, then these signs appear: the blister becomes black and declines in color.
Maybe if it is because of meat, then the blister is heavy, thick, and hard; and it becomes fixed according to a certain quantity.
Maybe if it is because of wind, then the touch is painful.
And the operation on it is that you consider whether it is because of blood flowing from an artery or vein, or wind; then, do not attempt to cure it, for in that part there is fear and worry as well as we have taught you about blisters caused by arteries and veins.
And if the umbilical eminence is because of the intestine or the hernia, then command the patient to lie down; and let him extend his body completely; and let them put a blade in the middle of the navel on the skin; and bind it up with a string; and cut off the excess around the navel; and tie it tightly so that it does not move; and cut off the larger part of the hernia at the roots; and bind it up well.
Then open the middle part of the navel and insert a finger; and if it hurts, then pull out the intestine little by little; and if you do not see any hernia, then cut off the middle part carefully with a sharp blade.
And if you have caught the intestine, then take it with your finger; and cut off its excess with a blade.
Maybe if it is against your artery or vein, then circle around that person, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in the roots of the hernia tightly with a string; and cut off the hernia's root with those needles; and bind the hernia up in four places with the needles.
And if you want, then take away the needles and let the location remain; or cut off the excess of the hernia with a blade, and heal it with water; or bind it up when it becomes thin, and let it go its own way; or cut it off when it is small.
And if the prominence of the navel is either flesh or humidity, then cover that you heal the abscess so as it had been said and destroy the humidity, which you find in it, and take care of that place so that it heals and consolidates.
Chapter II.
On the Treatment of Broken Bones.
I have spoken, in the division, of the kinds of broken bones and in what way they are to be cured with medicines, and that it is dangerous in their cure to use iron so as not to ulcerate; and I have spoken of the generation of cranks through the carefulness of their cure.
And they said to me that some broken bones are in a place where it is possible to remove them entirely, so as the bone which is in the breasts or in the crotch and similar to the limbs placed there, and especially when they are just beginning;
Not when it is old and big, do not cover that you approach it, for I cannot heal that bone nor have I ever seen such a thing, nor that it has come to water.
And the operation in it is when it is placed so as I have said, that you precede and lay down the patient, and purge him of black cholera with some pills, and then tie him up if there is manifest swelling.
And then prepare the patient for the operation, where it is placed, and draw out with a hook the nails which are in that; and then dig with all carefulness within so that there does not remain any cause of the patient's wounds. And let the swelling run down, and do not allow that urine flow out, and squeeze the swellings, and abstain from drinking great amounts of water all at once or with the help of an instrument which is in your power of the instruments.
But if there is contrariety of great swelling in a vein or artery, then cauterize that within so that the flow of the swelling ceases, and take care of that with other cure within so that it is healed.
Chapter IV.
On the Treatment of Hydropic Diseases.
We have already spoken, in the division, of the kinds of hydropic diseases of water, and of the characteristics of each kind, on the treatment of them with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not but the kind of alkalines alone, and it does not approach the kind of timpanites nor the kind of hyposarcia, because water is deadly.
And when you have already healed this kind of hydropic disease with medicines and do not confer with your medicine, then be careful, because if it is in him a fever or pain in the stomach similar to those, then do not give him iron, for there is great fear about it.
But if you see that the patient has an abundant virtue, and there is no other malady but hydropic disease alone, and neither child nor old man, then the way of performing the operation on him is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the minister squeezes his belly with his hand, driving the water out of a hole in the penthouse, and then takes a spike according to this form:
It is of two sharp parts long, with one sharp extremity so as to take a spike; but nevertheless it is in him a little brevity from little to little, so that in the operation on him there does not pass into the bowels, and that you hold him fast.
And then consider if the generation of hydropic disease is from part of the bowels, because it is said that you have to raise three fingers from the navel, on the right side over the penthouse.
But if the generation of hydropic disease is from the illness of a child, then your section is on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
And if the generation is by himself, then your section is on his right side.
Do not cover that your section is on the rib over which you wish to operate on the patient so that the superfluity does not run into that place.
And then pierce with the instrument all of it, and then insert it into that section, and raises his hand to the spike between the bowl and the syringe, and you squeeze him out; and if the quantity is of a little amount.
And then pierce the syringe so that it comes to the spike in the desired place, and this is a place of water. And then squeeze him out and insert an instrument, whose form is as follows: It is similar to a silver tube of thin diameter; it is made of silver or bronze or lead, and in its end there is a small hook, and in the sides there are three hooks: two from one side and one from the other; and its extremity is sharp according to the shape of a feather, as often as possible:
And in the extremity of it is an armlet, because when the instrument touches water, then immediately it gives back to the instrument, at the rate of half a droplet, because if you give back from that less, very strongly you will harm the patient with its resolution by his animal spirit, or you approach him to five times that are approaching death.
But evacuate from it the second quantity of its virtue and second what I have said to you about the dispositions of the patient's virtue and the goodness of him.
And then squeeze out the instrument, and hold back the water which causes it because so much is held back by the bowl over which the hook comes, which is on the syringe of which I have spoken to you that you pierce according to that form:
And then repeat the instrument to the other day if the patient tolerates water, and squeeze out a little quantity of water, and make it run over by a certain time on account of fear, and be careful not to do so that it does not flow out of water but a little.
But if you fear for the patient, and let a great quantity of water run out, then take care of him in the sand tail, and stir up the water with the hand, and wait for a long time; and take care of him with drying medicines so that he may be healed.
And then cauterize over the stomach, and the illness and the child take away water from it according to what I have said in it that is preceded.
Chapter V.
On the Treatment of Children Who Are Born with Bladder Diseases That Do Not Puncture.
Some of the children are born in the belly of their mother, and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is a straight hook or is not in its place).
So therefore pierce with a sharp spike as soon as he is born, according to this form:
And then insert into the hook a small lead pin and tie it up, and for three days or for four.
When he wants to urinate, let him rise and urinate; and then bring him back.
And if you do not stop the lead, it is possible that the urine which runs over the place does not stay closed.
And the hook of that child who is straight is to be cured with a lead pin as I have said, for three days so that it increases.
And those who do not have their hook in its place, let them be led, which causes it because from those comes the urination to the inside of him, and he raises his urine to his mouth through the opening; and it is not a generation, for the sperm cannot go into the mother according to its direction, and it is a disease.
And the technique for performing the operation is that the patient be placed on their back, and their head raised up by two pillows, so that the right side of their face is close to your left hand with a violent extraction, and you insert the point of the scalpel into the hole at the nose with a sharp edge, or if you cut off any hair, so that the half of the patient's face is similar to the head of the scalpel and that the thread falls in its correct place as it falls.
And be careful that in your operation of the bleeding of the nose, for there can happen to it what happened there; and pause with him until you cut off the nose, and heal the wound before it is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of the birth that happens in the foreskin at the head of the penis and of corruption and blackness and adhesions of the foreskin at the head of the penis.
There are seen these birthmarks on the shaft and is prominence of meat lag.
And of that one is malicious and the other is not-malicious.
Not-malicious, then you pause with a small needle and cut off that one within that it is completely removed; and then apply to that, cure it with pure oil within that it is healed.
And if the birthmark is malicious, of a dark color, then you pause with him that you administer to it a pointed cautery and its rasping.
Maybe if the birthmark is in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and one part of the birthmark is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you hold the birthmark that is inside until it is solid; and then you heal that which is outside, because when you heal that, if you heal that with a sharp edge, it is not certain that it has been circumcised.
And it is seen in the thighs and in the foreskin blackness and corruption, then you hold all that has already been stained and is beginning to corrupt or has already been corrupted; and then you line with it towards that which has been cut with flour of sour milk and with three times crushed and sieved.
And then heal that with the other healing within that it is healed.
Maybe if there is bleeding from the nose, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
because the younger cauterization is in two positions together, that is, for bleeding from the nose and for corruption when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed in that hour, then you pause with him that you introduce into the meat of the foreskin a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in that which the foreskin has, and on it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion happens by corruption or by abscess) then you cut with a blunt edge so that the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to cut those carefully, then you cut with a blade the root of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is pierced easily by its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a small blade, which is already wet with water so that it does not adhere to anything else.
And then be cured with the fifth ingredient within that it has been consolidated.
Chapter .lvii.
Of the cleaning of children and of the healing of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not only a solution for those who are circumcised: however, because it is part of our operation and our will, and for those whose circumcision is properly done in children, it is necessary that we assign them to the most appropriate operation and with lighter steps that bring about salvation.
Therefore, I say that the children do not say circumcision in some of the free times, because they do not have it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, which causes me to surprise most of the craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and purification with a needle and cutting with a sharp edge.
And I have seen all these ways, and I do not find better purification with scissors, with a sharp edge in purification with the needle, because the thread of the foreskin is divided into two tunics, and the string is cut off completely, and it is forced with another cutting and a certain pain. And in the purification that is done by alpecatation, which is a digital one, which is used by barbers, it is not secure to cut the extreme end of the male member, because it is forced into the trail of it.
Maybe in the operation with the needle, a strong man forces and corrupts your operation. And the thread of the child is short by nature, and there are seen in such a way that it does not require purification, and I have seen that one.
Maybe of the purification that is done with scissors and a sharp edge, goodness, experience tells me that, because the sharpness that is used is so sharp, therefore when you press your hand in proportionated two sharp things, and then cut it according to a comparison at a time; and a compression of the string is made to contain the thread of the penis completely, and with which there is no mistake at all.
And the technique of the first operation is that you leave the child very much if it is a small one, and that you do not cut but that you put the string on its penis only, and that you let go of that within another day.
And then he rejoices in all that way which is your possible way from it that receives its intelligence. And then he makes himself ready to stand between your two hands, and does not get tired; and hides the scissors in your hand or leaves the little child, so that the child does not see those or anyone else's instruments.
And then you place your hand on the penis of it and blows on the thread, and pulls that one in which it has been added to it of sordor.
The shape of the scissors for purification, this is the form:
If the extremities of the scissors are not sharp and the others are, so that it is not cut on the side of the claw, and the length of the two sharp things is as the length of two hands clasped together.
Maybe the error in purification is that it is forced with a thread completely inside, or a part of it has to be cut.
Then you hold that one of your hand in front of the apostenacy of the place and cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a pin and pierce it.
May the pain have lasted for three days, and then let it be that the pus is discharged from the wound; then leave it there until it is cured, and pierce it with a sharp tool and extract it with ease, and then pierce the second one as well, as if it were prepared.
And beware of the head of the stick, for it will not be given to you.
And therefore take care that the plague does not spread from the powder, which we have talked about in the treatise on powder.
And if it is pierced with a sharp object more than necessary, and you follow the instructions of this chapter, then do not give up hope.
And take care that the pain does not last long, for I have said that it should be cured.
Chapter LVIII.
Of the Treatment of Urine Retained in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or a dilated ureter, or by pollution or fecal matter, and is treated in accordance with the methods described in the chapter on treatments of the division.
And if the urine is not dissolved by the treatment described above for the patient, then extract it with an instrument called a syringe, which has this shape: It is of silver and thin, like a needle made of fine bronze, about half the length of a palm, with a thin tube at one end, like the tip of a feather.
And the way to introduce the urine into the syringe is this: bend the tube and tie it at its end with a good knot; then introduce the two ends of the tube, one after the other, into the opening of the bladder, and pierce them both with sharp scissors if there is any need for cutting away any hair from the opening; but first insert the tube into the urethra with force.
Then let the patient lie on his back and place a pillow under his feet; anoint the bladder with olive oil and water, and with oil of olive and vinegar.
Then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the penis; then double the tube upside down from the opening; and then pierce that one until it reaches the bladder, and this one must be inserted in the order described above, unless there is some obstacle to its progress.
Then stretch the tube little by little, for urine causes hair to grow.
Then extract that one and use it to pass urine, and use the syringe if there is difficulty in passing urine, and with the help of the syringe until the bladder is completely emptied and the pain relieved.
Chapter LIX.
Of the Qualities of Bladder Irrigation with a Cistern and Similar Instruments.
When an ulcer or abscess appears in the bladder, or there is a sudden swelling due to an injury, and you want to irrigate the bladder with water and medicines, then use an instrument called a cistern, which has this shape:
It is closed at one end, like a jar, and has a hole in its side for a pipe to pass through. There are three openings in the top: two smaller ones next to each other, and a larger one between them.
At the beginning it is placed in a wet place, and according to the amount of urine produced; if any cause makes it flow, then let it flow with urine, and when it is expelled, let it be collected with water; and when it is expelled far away, according to how the cistern is shaped, so that it flows back into the bladder with urine, and when it is discharged from the body, according to the shape of the cistern, as if it were applied in a battle at sea.
Then when you want to introduce humid air into the bladder, insert the end of the pipe into the moisture in the cistern; for the moisture is introduced into the bladder with the air that is forced upwards.
Then insert the end of the tube into the penis, as described for the syringe; then let the moisture be forced with air, for that moisture will pass to the bladder and also to the man, for the moisture is forced by the air.
This is a shape of cistern made of subtle metal, so that the bladder can be irrigated with water and medicines; this is its shape:
It is to be made of silver or lead, the top part being like a small feather, and having a tube extending inside; and let it have a cover.
Then set the bladder in motion, and let the moisture that you want to infuse be placed between two folded tubes; then heat that moisture with fire.
Then insert the end of the cistern into the penis.
Then take your hand off the bladder with the tube attached, and let the moisture reach the bladder; for that moisture will be forced by the man's movement.
And if you do not have a bladder, then take a pig's bladder and make it into a circle; then pierce that circle throughout; then insert the tube strongly into the openings, turning them as you go along; then add the circle to the end of the tube, as soon as it is pierced, so that there will be no leakage; but first place the tube in water and oil.
Then take that instrument and place it on the bladder, and express the moisture onto the bladder, so that it reaches the bladder; for that moisture will reach the man by movement of the bladder.
Chapter LXI.
Of the Discharge of Urine.
We have already talked about the types of urine and the treatment of it with medicines, and the difference between urine produced in the lungs and that produced in the bladder, and the signs of each one.
We have described the types of urine according to its smell and color, and the treatment of it with medicines; we have also spoken about the operation of cats and section.
Urine produced in the bladder itself is that which is retained in the bladder.
We have described this urine with manifest description and abbreviation.
Then let me tell you that urine produced in the bladder is mostly passed by children; and the signs of it are that the urine passed from the bladder is like water in its subtility, and appears on the skin; and the man rubs his penis, and then it looks like sperm; and at the moment of ejaculation it appears like a thread.
This treatment is good for children for twelve years, and difficult to treat in the elderly. It is halfway between water and urine in young people, as it is somewhere between these two ages.
And of that which produces the least urine and has the most treatment; and if there is little, it is opposite to that.
Then let us come to the treatment of urine, let us examine the man from head to foot; for that hole in the bladder may sometimes be a cause of the disease through which urine passes; for those holes sometimes prevent urine from being discharged.
And place the patient on their side and press them with your feet and hold them in this way so that the pain does not move to the front of the bladder or jump from one place to another.
And place this hook between your legs, and the legs of the patient be left open, that the whole bladder may decline into the parts which are left open.
Then turn around and lie on your side with your feet towards the window.
Then if you feel pain in the space, then turn yourself over onto your back with your legs open.
And if you do not completely free the patient's treatment, then cover yourself with a blanket and anoint him with olive oil from the left side, if he is a child, or with the oil of the day if it is an adult, and enter him in his buttocks. Then turn yourself over so that the pain is on the left side. And slowly turn that little hook little by little towards the neck of the bladder.
And press on it with your hand from the left side, and expel that little hook to one side through the opening where you have turned yourself over.
And order the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and order another minister to open the legs at their ends, and to push back the pubic bone from the opening where you have turned yourself over, in front of the leg.
Then enter the spatalum blade that is not sharp which has this form: Then cut him in half with that blade between the buttocks and the legs, not in the middle, moving towards the left side of the crotch; and make a transversal section there, so that the opening from behind is wide and smooth according to the amount that pain allows you to do it, and no more, because if you press too hard on the bladder it may burst.
You should know that there is no pain which does not cause difficulty in turning yourself over, since it becomes difficult to enter with the hook.
And of that water is like a lion's roar, and it is round, and is very difficult to enter with ease.
Then if it is that which has no angles or edges, adjust it in the opening.
And if it is not easily entered thus, then cover yourself with it or hold it gently against your body, the tip of which is pointed at the place where you feel pain, and do not remove it from there; or enter a thin hook from one side.
Maybe if you cannot turn yourself over, then increase the stretch a little, and if you feel pain in your feet, cut it with a sharp three-sided instrument.
Maybe if the pain is more than one place, then at first you press your hand to the opening of the bladder and cut yourself on it; and then press a little hook into it; and make a small cut if there are more than two places.
And if the pain is very much, then ignore that you cut it with a large section, because such things happen to the patient when there are two causes: or because the bladder is full, or because the urine runs continuously, since the opening is not completely closed.
Then minister expel from him whatever is inside that is not easily removed, or enter with a hook to cut it into pieces.
Then when you have finished your work, then fill the wound with plant juice of aloe and dragon's blood, and press it. And place a cloth over yourself made of linen, or of rosewater, or of soap water, that the blister may not burst.
Then turn the patient on their side and do not release the ligature within three days.
Then when you have removed the ligature, dip the wound in water and some oil, and then cure it with a mixture of turpentine and saltpetre, and with a mixture of caraway and calamine within which is cured.
Maybe if you have a blister that bursts, it will become painful and the bladder will be damaged, and it may cause corruption of the bladder and decay; enter with your hook into the wound and extract the piece of skin, since if it is not removed it will lead to the death of the bladder.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to all kinds of medicine, with water that brings the cure within itself so that it is cured.
Then in the hours when all the cures are finished, place both cushions and adjust the medicines which have been placed on the wound.
And if the pain is small and it is in the middle of the penis, and is stuck there, and there is no urine coming out, then cure that with water that you drink before starting the section, because three veils have been removed for this treatment; and already I drank some, and now I will drink some more. And this is how one cuts with a knife in such cases:
a three-sided tool, taken up, fixed, placed at the tip.
Then take it firmly, and lay it on the patient's side so that the pain does not return to the bladder.
Then enter the knife into the penis with ease, piercing easily at its tip: Then turn the knife around in that same place little by little, and you will open the hole there if it does not come out easily, since the urine comes out at times.
Then place your hand on that which is at the back of the penis' opening, because it is curved, and it is easily removed with urine, and the patient is healed.
Maybe if this treatment does not suit you for some reason which prevents you from using it, then place one fid on the patient' side, and another fid on their back. Then enter two fid's on the wound between two ligatures. Then remove that. Then release the ligature and cure the blistered skin, which is done in the wound.
It is not necessary to place a fid on the patient' side in order to prevent it from returning to the bladder, but rather so that it does not move; and when the fid is removed, the cord returns to its place and heals the wound.
It is necessary to support the cord on top of the patient' side when you tie it up, so that the cord does not move; or return it towards the front, and mend the wound like this:
Capitol 31.
From the extraction of women's pain.
Pain in women is rare.
Maybe if you have any of that pain, then the treatment for it is difficult and requires special methods.
One of them is because a strong woman's laughter is annoying.
Another reason is that you do not find any beautiful woman who can discover whether she is married or not, or if she has been married before.
The third reason is that you do not know any beautiful woman who knows this skill, mostly the operation with her hands.
The fourth reason is that the place where you cut on women is far from where the pain is, so it hurts more, and there is fear in that.
Maybe if necessity compels you to do this, then you will find a good wife who is not afraid.
If you are lacking one, then seek out a middle-aged woman with a slender and gentle figure, or the lady who is being carried in this article's treatment of women.
Therefore, have her present herself and command her to do whatever you send her to do, from the inquiry about the matter until the beginning; this is because she will look whether the woman is a virgin, then cover that she places her foot in his buttocks and wants the matter.
Therefore, if you are able to get her, remove those from her, and then command her to mark her.
If she is not a virgin, then command the middle-aged woman to insert her foot into the patient's crotch and mark it out, also that she puts her left hand on the bladder, and the servant holds her firmly.
Therefore, if you are able to get her, then cover that she gently touches the orifice of the bladder at the sides while summoning a small amount of her juice; this is because it reaches the edge of the cushion.
And then mark that position of the middle-aged woman' head at the edge of the crotch from which some part comes out to him stopped and centered the matter on that part, and this saying of him is not remanded due to the matter coming out by cutting those from him.
And the incision should be little at the beginning; then he inserted the ray on that section, and if he feels the matter, then adjust the section according to the quantity which I know that the matter will go out of it.
And you should know that the matter of the matter is small: for there are some that are little and great, and fierce and sharp, and long and round, and have spines.
Therefore you should know how many species of it are for the water that you intend to place on this that you want.
And if you want to remove the pain quickly, then adjust in that virulent place three times and hold it there for an hour until it is removed, and then return to your operation before the matter comes out.
And make sure that you prepare the instruments which he says in the extraction of matter in men for you to be helped by them in your operation.
And if you want to remove the pain quickly, and you know that the extraction of the matter is from the incision, then you pause dust on the place and stir it with powder and stricture down, and do not repeat this; and leave the matter behind and do not extract that, for a strong person will die. Then heal the plague.
Therefore, when the pain becomes less acute, he recovers in that place, then you return to your operation before the matter comes out.
Chapter 62.
About Section on Hernias.
Hernias are nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the cipha (a white fluid), which leaves the cord of the genitals containing water, and is called cipha.
Some are in the proper pannicula (a white fluid) which nature has prepared at the joining of the genitals, before it is a different baby; and this is the cord of the genitals between the cipha (white fluid) which we have mentioned, and is not water but tar.
The generation of such a hernia is due to the weakening that occurs in the genitals, so that this substance is enfused on them, and sometimes it is caused by trauma made on the genitals.
And this moisture is not colored, for its color is changing to yellow or blood, or rust, or black, or it is white and moist, and is water which is more.
And the signs by which this accumulation of water can be detected: for if it is in the cipha  (white fluid) which we have mentioned, then the apoptope is slightly red towards the end, and has a cow's shape, and appears between the genitals, since that moisture contains all its parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper pannicula  (a white fluid), then the apoptope is slightly at the joining of the baby and thus one can estimate that it is another baby.
And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the cipha  (white fluid), then it is half a centimeter long.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture in the apoptope on the sides of which the shape is preceded; and according to what it has come out in the trace of the side, judge that it is inside it.
Therefore when we come to the healing of him through the drinking, then cover that we order the dog that he is drinking if water is possible for him; and wash his fur.
Then he should be put on his back for a little while or two, and have left him alone, and cover him with a few sheets of linen.
Then set yourself on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow the right side of him, which extends his staff between the cord of the genitals and the marvel of the womb.
Then prepare a knife and cut the cord of the genitals from their place along the length up to the pentennill.
Then the section should be made according to a guide that is equally distant from the line that you want to follow on the fur of the genitals, so that it reaches the cipha   (white fur) all at once.
Then peel it, and observe, and keep it aside for such a thing that you do not peel it; and your peeling of it on the side that is peeling from the baby as much as possible, and gently examine the peeling according to the quantity that you want.
Then he should pierce the cipha   (watery fur) with a wide piercing, and take out all the water.
Then separate the two sides of the section by a nail, and extend the cipha    (white fur) at its sides; and do not touch the cord of the genitals all at once, and cut the cipha   (white fur) in the way that you want. Then cut it in its entirety or in parts, and most importantly, the sides of the cipha   (white fur), since if you do not scrutinize carefully the cutting of him, the water will not return.
If the baby is removed from the cord in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cipha    (white fur), return inside it, and then adjust the two sides of the cord of the genitals by suturing them, and then heal that one as well as the others' plagues, so that it is healed.
And if you encounter the baby corrupted by another plague, then cover that you break the vessels which are under the suspender, and remove the baby, and then heal it with water which we have mentioned.
If the water is collected in two parts, then know that they are two hernias; therefore, cut that part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
Then you should wash the matter, and immerse it in oil or rose oil; and put on another piece of linen which you have immersed in wine and oil, and extend that one over the two genitals and the wonder of the womb; and place folded sheets and dust, and tie those one by one according to this form:
Then place two sheets and crumple them according to this appearance; and make the extremities by which they are pressed with a cloth or with wet wool, and bind them together in the brazer of the braze; and one extremity be tied to the other within the two, and the second be tied to the marvel of the womb, and the two extremities be placed on two cushions and on two angles, and all the structure be adjusted in the brazer of the braze.
And some are treated surgically by cauterization instead of cutting; because you take a sharp knife and burn the knot of the genitals, and is ignited according to what we have counted within which is discovered the white cipher containing water, and then you take cauterization according to this form: and it is assembled into the Greek letter.
And then pierce the cipher, and is ignited within that all moisture be expelled.
And then extend the cipher with your nails, and scrape it with your nails, and burn it slightly with fire; and incise it according to what you can do so that you eradicate all of it; and keep away from the fire so that the fire does not touch it.
And you know that this operation is less dangerous and further away from the flow of blood, and better than an operation by cutting.
Perhaps if you cause an emulsion during the time of cutting or cauterization or blood flow, then cover that you cure what adversity does to you by this water, with the treatment which is said.
Perhaps if the patient is a bit thin, and does not expect the second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation according to what I have said water; and it is when it is confirmed that you, by means of the water that we have said about signs, that this hernia is watery.
And then cover that you make the patient lie on some raised cushion, and pierce the emulsion in the lower part of them with a sharp blade, and pause the piercing according to the length of the body.
And is the wide opening within which all the water runs.
Then place it over the area with a cloth and let it rest there, so that the blood runs out. And then cure it within which the plague is healed.
Perhaps if adversity comes to the excretion of water in that hour that you pierce it: and it is not done except by means of the water which comes out from under the white cloth at the orifice of the plague causes adversity and prevents the emergence of water, then cover that you introduce into the plague a small or instrument with which the water is extracted, the form of which is preceded; or fix in the compression of the plague a small.
And you know that water returns, and is gathered again in a few months or years; and when it is added, then pierce it according to that method because the patient will spend its days.
Chapter LXXXIII.
On Surgery on Fatty Hernias and the Treatment of Them.
You know that in surgery on this hernia is lost to danger in the major cases; so that to me is seen the dismissal of it and is saved by that one better.
And I remember the operation on that one and the spices of the emulsions.
Therefore, say that the emulsion comes out in the bodies of those whose genitals are mixed up and is caused by certain causes: or by excess acute water that is distributed on the genitals, or by impact.
And it is the color of the emulsion according to the color of the body, and does not turn pale in pain, and it is a heavy emulsion.
And there is a very hard emulsion, of which the color is dark, and does not feel to it.
And some are caused by a knot of the arteries, and by swelling of those veins; so that their recurrence is noticed, or by swelling of the veins.
Perhaps water that is caused by swelling of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the emulsion when you press it with your fingers; and does not cover that you touch it.
Perhaps water that is caused by swelling of a vein is not dispersed by pressing it with your fingers.
And it is possible that on this kind of disease surgery be done and on the other flesh; because you burn the knot of the genitals, and then put the fire to the branches from above, and tear those down, and burn the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them together, and incise them in the middle of what you burn.
Therefore if the water is already consolidated on that flesh, then cover that you extract the water and incise it.
And if there is adhesion within the cipher for any reason or between that which is between the veins, then cover that you tear all that adhesion and incise it with a round cut.
Perhaps if there is a birthmark of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then cover that you incise all that is of him, and extract the water as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the plague with wool-soaked oil and look at it; and then cure it with the other treatment within which it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
On the Treatment of Hernia that is painful.
There is an emulsion wrapped around the genitals, which seems like a growth due to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move exercise and walking on the patient's legs.
And in the treatment of this disease is by fear because of the water from which it is preceded remembrance.
However, cover that I say surgery on that one as follows:
And I say that you make the patient lie on a raised cushion; and then put the suspenders of the genitals at the lower ends; and then burn the knot of the genitals with your fingers, so that they are torn from side to side by the fire; and keep those other ministers that you have, and extend them with great violence.
Then incise it with a sharp blade in the middle of the cross section of the veins within which the vessels are exposed.
And then scrape off all that as you have said in the extraction of arterial vessels, which are located in the temple.
Then place there a small needle in which is double, and let it rest in the first of the places in which it occurs in pain; and place another needle below that one. Then incise those in the middle of the body with a right-angle cut according to its length, and extract what is added from the foul, corrupted moisture.
Then cure the plague with the treatment of other plagues in which you want to heal it; so that they fall the vessels which are torn between two genitals, because it is not bad for water.
Perhaps if there is pain in all the vessels, then cover that the testicles are extracted or that they are cut off by water from the vessels; so that nutrition is deprived of the treatment of the vessels, and are destroyed, or that it is cut off by so that it does not increase by means of those.
Chapter LXv.
On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.
The appearance of this hernia is due to the section which becomes entangled in the white cipher extended over the belly from both sides of the navel, so that, when the bowels break through it, they go out of one part and into another.
And this rupture is either of the cipher or due to an expansion; and it occurs for certain causes: or by impact, or by noise, or by a cry, or by elevation for some difficult reason, or by resembling.
And the sign of this is that it appears little by little in a long time, and not suddenly; and it is an emulsion wrapped around the intestine within the belt because the cipher compresses the bowel.
And the sign of him is when it happens to cut the cipha (hernia), for at the beginning it causes violent pain; and it appears as if there were a swelling just next to the hernia, and this is due to the expansion of the intestine, and his hand is in front of the openings of the cipha.
And some hernias are overlooked with the intestine's mesh, and this is called an intestinal hernia of the perineum.
And some open to the air, and some form a hole in the hernia, and here it is held back, and it causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes causes severe pain and more when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these diseases with fire is feared, so that it is necessary to avoid the heating in that area.
And the way to operate on that area is that the patient returns the intestine to its cavity if you obey the return, and a cushion is placed between them, and raises their legs.
And place the hernia between the legs, and cut it all along its length; and then fix it with two blades according to how you want to open the area to remove it.
And if, in the opening, as much is removed from that area as you can get.
And then remove those hernia strings that are left between the testicles, until the white hard cipha is exposed from all sides.
Then you put your fingers in there that cut the testicle, in there where the white cipha is hard, and leave the string of the hernia on the patient's side, and between the cipha and behind the testicles, and remove the adhesion that is in the back part of them.
And then return the testicles to their cavities on the patient' side, and extend the cipha white in front of you, on the left side, and lifts up the testicle with it towards the opening of the cut; and orders the servant to extend the testicle before you, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind.
And look with your fingers that there is no cause of the hernia wrapped in the white cipha. But if you find any cause, then examine it from behind.
And then cut through the hernia string between the testicles with a section that has been described before, as we have said above.
And then administer a bath with oil, and place it in the hole; and administer the thread that we have described (and sometimes the white cipha is cauterized, which we have said to cut it from behind to avoid the flow of blood, because sometimes this happens) and leave the thread inside it so that it falls by itself.
But if the hole is late, then water is added to it, and place it inside according to what we have said.
And then treat the wound with the other treatment of wounds before it heals.
Chapter LXVI.
On Ventilated Hernia.
In this hernia there is nothing that has been heated with fire in the treatment of it to make it better.
And the first ones said that it should be done in this way that we have described in the hernia that is to be used with ease of the patient; which is to place the vessels appropriately on the wound with a little water; and then dry them in their place in the environment of the swelling with the water that has been poured out, so that they fall.
And treat the wound as we have said before it heals.
Chapter LXVII.
On the Dropping that Occurs in the Ankles.
And sometimes a drop occurs in the ankles as we have said, and it comes out; and leave the spot.
And do not let any cause of hernia be at the genitals; and if there is one, it is little; and returns in all hours.
But if the time is extended with it, a small fracture occurs in the cipha within it that breaks the hernia into the cipha; and this happens to the ankle as we have said, which causes the cipha to be extended, and then it becomes soft and swollen, and comes out.
And the treatment of it is with cauterization before the description of it.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this way: and that the patient jumps on his two legs between your hands, and then dries up the place of the drop that comes out by cutting it with a small knife according to the quantity of three inches.
And then stretch the white cipha that is below the hernia, so that it is exposed.
And then take a string and place it over the forward edge of the cipha, and press it on the front part of the patient' stomach.
And then cut the two forward edges over the end of the string of the cipha, and adjust one to the other with a thread.
And then cut off the end of the string, and do not cut it from the cipha, nor extend the testicles, nor any other cause as you should know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And that hernia is cured with the treatment of wounds, and when you cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound before it heals; because the cipha is contracted, and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
Cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
For softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
For softening of the scrotum of the testicles in some men it is softened by oil because the flesh that lies between them is softened and attention is paid to him.
Then it is necessary for him who is asked in the treatment of him that he lays down according to his two feet and in the middle all the scrotum which is softened over the natural one; and then let him join two lips on the suture.
And if you want, cut at the beginning the superfluity of the softened scrotum by three or four and firm suture.
Then sew between the sutures; and then care for the treatment of the other wounds within that it is healed and the hairs fall down.
Chapter .lxxxix.
For castration.
You know that castration in our law is prohibited, more for a cause is granted to me that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to mention it except by two ways, of which one is that so he may be in the knowledge of the doctor when he is questioned about it, that he knows the treatment of him who has been cast out; and the other way is that we have had the need of castration of other animals for our benefit by those, such as donkeys, and goats, and pigs, and animals similar to them.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting off through the belly, or by a section with an incision.
More in that which is done by cutting off through the belly, the way of the operation is that they make a cut to the animal in the tail end within so that the genitals of him are softened and are limp and that they hang down. Then take those from your hand within that they are firm and do not appear to be loose after the touch.
More in castration made by incision and section, tell that you have the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
Then remove the suspenders, and sew on each side by one incision within two inches that proceed from him.
Then sew those pus that you have taken out of each wound. And do not leave on those of the cicatrice any cause, but the subtle cicatrice above the veins.
This way of castration is better that which is done by cutting off through the belly, because through the belly leaves a cause of the testicles for which the beast desires to copulate.
Then care for the wound within that it is healed.
Chapter.lxx.
For the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: the one is because it appears that he has between his testes a space that separates them like a woman's two testes are formed; and the other is that it appears as a penis and testicles of a female.
And some have from him urine that is in the scrotum of the testicles.
More in women is one kind: and it is that the scrotum of the female is like two testes of a man, little by little to the penis; and like two testes of a woman.
The treatment is according to three kinds: from two men's kind and from one kind of women's. It is because you sew those parts that are adjusted within that it escapes the cause of him, and then that you care for them with treatment to the other wounds.
And in the second kind of men from whom you have urine that is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no treatment nor operation for him.
Chapter.xxi.
Of ligature and of flesh that protrudes because of women.
A strong ligature is adjusted on natural causes within that it is stretched and is made to leave the mark; and some have from him that protrudes in such a way that it appears as in men' kind, and is turned within when he comes together.
Then take those who have from him of the ligature with your hand or a knife and sew them up.
And do not end in incision, more in the edge of the nose, that it does not cause a flow of blood.
Then care for those with treatment to the wounds within that they are healed.
More hidden flesh is flesh that lies in the belly of a mother within that it fills him, and it is strong enough to separate it from the other side according to its form of a cow; then sew those as you sewed the ligature, and care for those with treatment to the wounds within that they are healed.
Chapter.lxxii.
For the treatment of a rash.
Altratica is that the nose of the female not be pierced, or that it be little by little. It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is through bad health that preceded, and that one has been made or not by a subtle or strong blow.
It is made either in the belly of a mother, or in the sides of him, or on the top of him, or on the bottom of him, and you prohibit that it touch or engage or bring forth, and strongly prohibit that there be menstruation.
The knowledge of that one is made by looking at the mirror of the doctor, if the opacity is apparent, then look for it with a sharp instrument or with fire; but if it is not apparent, then you look for those with the fingers or with the rays.
More if opacity is made by subtle means, and it appears between the two lips, then cut those and break them up.
It is that you pause on the two lips with your fingers, and then pause the sharp edges of both sides in front of them.
The woman is over her two feet, her two knees stretched out, and then she breaks the two lips with a subtle force within that it is broken by that subtle means and opacity appears.
Then take a lock of hair and send it to the doctor, and place that one on the spot, and test him with the man for the spot is not consolidated.
More if the subtle means is large and strong, then you sew that one with a sharp edge or with fire.
More if opacity is made by flesh, then hang those up with a string, and sew them up.
And are to you the medicines that stop the flow of blood by biting, such as astringent, and blood from a dragon, and enemas, adjusted to the skin of two.
Then administer a wide steel bowl of lead that the plague is not consolidated excessively.
Keep that one for many days and administer hot water.
Then that one should be cured with the other treatment of consolidation within that it is healed.
Sometimes in the mother's nature there is another kind of flesh, and then sew according to this way. More if it is because of an acrid flesh, and to the acrid flesh in the mother that is not made by any means.
Chapter.lxxiii.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids and of a red boil that appears in the scrotum of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appearance of the openings of veins that come from those, and if they become hard, then they are hemorrhoids and cause pain continuously; and if they are soft, then they are hemorrhoids and cause a burning sensation.
And I have already said in the division the spices of those and the signs of those, and say also those that I receive cure and those that I do not receive cure.
And say that hemorrhoids and they appear when they are in the front of the mother and do not feel, then in those there is no need to make a cure.
And these those who are in the orifice of the mother above which feel, are those that are cured.
And when you place the woman in a mayo rub and extend it with the scissors or sharp cloth, and cut those with the razors.
And sprinkle on those you need to make a powder from one of the powders cut with a mordida, so with mint and similar for those.
And tie their feet for an hour, and then put them in hot water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make those cut with a decoction of Sumac and scorsas of millet and oranges and similar.
And return to take flour of wheat and eat them with honey and vinegar and make a paste with water on their two feet.
And if the blood has stopped, it is good; and otherwise, make them adhere to the two vents, and to the nipples cut the razor.
And take a sheep's wool and immerse those with the juice of cilantro or the juice of arnica or the juice of grapevines in warm water and make them adhere to the place; and then heal the place with poultice.
And heal that place so that it is cured.
Chapter. LXXIV.
Of the perforation of the placenta in the mother.
There are various types of symptoms that can occur in the mother: as well as a sharp and piercing sound, an ulcerous and painful condition, scabs and dry spots, erythema and blisters, hemorrhoids and rugosas and other ulcers. And I have already said these diseases and the symptoms of those and the signs of those, and the cure for them in the division.
And when I say in this treatise about the perforation of the placenta that is cured with surgery, and if you want to know how to perform the operation.
Then consider if the pain of the placenta at the beginning is acute with percussion and fever and sometimes that dampens it and if it feels on that; then do not perforate it, but heal it with water that helps with the maturity within so that the acuteness of the symptoms stops.
And then, when you cut the woman on a table that there are two; lean her on her back and adjust her feet to the sides of the body, and expand her legs, and pause her breasts from the side, and lie down with one hand towards water.
And the midwife follows the woman's left side and brings the instruments with her; and she will cut the opening of the mother, which will be in those cases that you do.
And when you want to bring the instrument: you place yourself on the right side of the mother of the woman, and that which enters into the mother is only the front part of the womb, and all of the patient's legs. And if the instrument is greater than the front part of the womb, then place powder on the texture of the front part of the womb so that it is forbidden to enter any instrument into the front part of the womb.
And place the liquid that runs in the instrument above it and that the midwife holds the instrument and mixes the liquid within so that it enters the opening of the mother.
And when there is excitement and it feels soft and wet, then place the foot of the woman on a sponge.
And when the cure is evacuated, then place in a cup submerged in rose or green oil and pause the blood in the section in the front part of the womb.
And then place the womb upside down on clean wool dampened with water in which are swelled purplish colors.
And it should be healed after two days of applying poultice with water within so that it is cured.
And some women are washed after delivery, and their milk is clarified with water and honey, and they are bathed in water in which are swelled razor blades or a long hair, and then return to the poultice.
And if the milk is inside the womb, then refrain from treating it with surgery, because heal that place with water which I have said in the division.
Chapter. LXXV.
Teaching midwives the way in which they should wash the babe when it is born according to this figure, so that it is not natural.
A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes at the beginning of the natural childbearing according to the signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express herself by the legs apart and her desire to smell the air, and above her is enveloped by water that flows over her; and if she sees the birth as an expression on her head, then know that this birth is a second natural figure, and the expression of it over his head, and the second one hanging or suspended from the navel.
Then when you see these signs, then the womb of the woman is contracted so that the childbearing expression slightly turns over her head, and put it under his head, and those superfluities are removed with good hygiene.
And that which is different from this natural birth is not worthy and it is that when the childbearing is expressed over its own body and the back of it is expressed in front of its head and its feet are expressed; and the mother's hand is a hand, or behind her neck: or is expressed on its head and the mother' hand, or at the navel of it, and a strong expression turns over its neck, and similar to those unworthy figures.
A necessary cause is that the midwife is wise and subtle in all these cases, and she guards against error and deception.
And I am showing you all those figures, and what is significant in them that it is meant by water and that it is placed on it.
And when the childbearing expression is expressed on his head by natural effort, and that one is violent with the woman and makes difficult the birth, and if her virtue has been defeated, then make her cut, or that women have it, and evaporate its sweat with fenugrec poultice and olive oil.
And the midwife places between her legs a small towel and cuts it with a sharp object, and then make her run on that leg within so that it flows water there. And press the womb of the woman within so that she expresses the child.
And if they do not express, then make the woman clarified with mealy seeds and clarified with fenugrec poultice.
And then command it, and make it clarified, and make her sneeze with this condition: and for a long time after birth, because the child is difficult.
And if the two more of the child are sneezing at the beginning, then reduce those with small steps. But if you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a table and lift her feet off of it, and bring the table close to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall down with the shock.
And if the legs are not turned inward and the feet do not come out whole, then cut them off at the leg and remove the body part with an equal cut, for it is a severed limb.
And when the child is on their own feet, then cover them up and turn the child over, and then stretch it out little by little; take one of its legs and bend it backwards.
But when the child is born inside the woman's thighs, then command him to squeeze and make him come out with force, for it is severed if God wills it.
And if it is not severed with the force that I have just described, then return the child little by little until you put him in his natural position again; for he will be severed if forced to emerge whole.
And if it is forbidden to do all that I have just described, then take the muscle of the thigh and the gum dissolved, and strike them all together with a good blow in the mortar; and then draw the navel string from the woman's belly button, the bottom-most part. Then make a cut in the water, so that he can reach the belly; and then bring him out, for he is being born.
And when the parts of the child are no longer elongated, then make him sub-fume with mint and pause him below. And when the sub-fume has lasted for an hour, then place him on a table, and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and take it away, and press the belly button little by little with a light compression, because the child will soon be severed if forced.
Emmergence of the child in a hanging position with one of its feet. Let the child be lowered by his mother's hand, but if you cannot lower it, then raise the woman and let her go.
And if she cannot go, then place her on the bed and strike her with a violent shock, and then administer to him the liquids that I have just described.
And if the child is born, then make him sneeze on a table and study his reduction; then take the child in its natural position, and let it be struck with sneezes and ordered to squeeze himself until he is being severed.
Emmergence of the child on the woman's back, with its feet extended, and its waist between her legs. Cover the mother holds the child's hand and turn it little by little; and let her do it easily.
And when he is being engaged in marriage, and when he is being put into the navel, then place it on the string that I have just described of oil and liquid.
Then order him to move his hand little by little, and when he has completed it, then make a cut on a table and order him to bend forward; and then order him to squeeze himself, and let him sneeze with force. The exit of the fetus is prepared on its side.
When the woman's horror is in accordance with this method, consider it, and then you shall cut the second one with your knife within you; so that it may be emptied of its moisture.
And if the child is suspended above its mother' s back and her neck, then you shall cut it off, so that it is not held up and it does not die.
Then support the child between its legs until you can stop it; and order the woman to compress herself several times, and let him be severed if God wills it.
The exit of twins or a multitudinous fetus. Know that twins are not a natural event, but sometimes two or three or four; and when there is one, it is strange to say it; but in nature there are two causes, and not three.
And as for those, if they are multiplied, a second one, and let them be separated by a cut, distinguishing between them in the navel of each one; and some are severed by natural separation, like twins, and some are not lausabla by their own nature, and some are not.
And if they are difficult to explain by their own nature of the child, then you shall pay attention to them; for those who have been described as not natural and not living, I will now tell you about them.
And if the woman is subtle and has a flexible waist, and if she is late, and if it is a subtle figure of her being prepared for the salvation of all.
Recall that it is formed in the mother' s womb from embryos and those who are aborted.
Some veils are formed in the mother one, two, three, four, and v, vi, vii, ten times, and it has already been verified that a woman gets pregnant six times, and another ten times altogether, which causes fo to be made by measurement of the glorious sages.
And I say that it is in the science of the mother, for her power over such a small and insignificant thing; and therefore pause at that point where you said to stop.
Chapter LXXVI.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you take care of the dead child in accordance with the division of medicine and it is not being separated by force from what I have described, then consider whether the woman is of sound health or not; for the loss of a child is sometimes a great loss for which a woman is sorely bereaved.
Then place the woman on her back on the bed, and have her head bent forward, and let her feet be raised.
The minister hold the woman' s hand with two parts, or let her be tied to the bed, so that his head does not extend too far forward during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the mother' s mouth with oil, and with mint, and with fennel seed, and with licorice root.
Then wash the mother' s hand with those oils and liquids; then bring it up in the woman' s way, and let her hold the child' s foot between her toes, and make a cut on its navel.
And place it conveniently in water: then consider whether the wound is prepared that you send it on top of his head, and then you fix the nails in his feet, or his neck, or his mouth, or his palate, or let his beard, or his fork, or the places closest to his ribs, or his hipbones.
But if the discharge is on his feet, then in the middle of the back, or between the ribs.
And where he has the nail in his right hand, and places the bend of him in that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and inserts his hand easily and fixes the nail in one of those places that we have said, until it reaches the cause of the wound.
Then return and fix in the position of him another nail, or the third if necessary, so that it is a traction hook, and not an extraction according to the rule so much alone.
Then it is good from the beginning, so that the discharge of him is relieved thus, because it is done in teeth by removing the root of him.
And where in the water that between them is softened the extraction; and if some part of him is retained, then consider where the woman pours some oil and inserts those things and turns them with those water that are retained.
Then if the discharge of the child is forgotten, then the nails are exchanged between places which are put together; and do so until all the discharge is forgotten.
But if the mother is discharged in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then consider that she be wrapped around that; and then extract that until all is forgotten, and incise that or on the joint of the hand or on the neck.
Then consider that you pass over the other hand and the two feet.
But if the head of the child is great, or happens to him the contraction during the discharge, or it is in the head of the water that is adjusted, then consider that you insert between the fingers spiky and cut the head and extract the water, or that you separate that with an instrument which is called "alundat", the shape of which will come to the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which is close to this.
And apparently pass if the child is of great head by nature: and then consider that you incise that with a knife, or that you take that with an alundatum; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is discharged and contracted from the fork, then consider that it be cut within so that the moisture which is in the foot be spilled.
But if it is not complicated, or does not obey the discharge, then you incise the head as soon as it is possible according to your ability.
And if the intestines of the belly are putrefied or it is in the hydropic, then consider that you perforate that within which runs the moisture which is in him.
But if the discharge is on his feet, then the traction of him is light and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is light.
But if the contraction is from the belly and the foot, then consider that you extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and then cut the belly and the foot within so that the water which is in them runs.
But if the other members are held back and turned the head, then the mother inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert that into the mouth of him, and then return in him a nail, or two nails, and throw him towards those within the mouth of the mother, and then insert in him another nail, or two nails.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by apoplexy and that happens to the child, then consider that it not be disturbed on him; before returning, then administer a stream of moist air. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in water which softens and moisten.
But if the discharge is on his side, then consider that it be sliced as much as possible; and water which has been said in the living child is administered.
But if water is not possible, then cut him in pieces, and extract him.
And where you do not leave any cause inside the second.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer water which has been said in the apoplexy by the cause which has happened from the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood, then discharge it in stiff water and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose belly there was a dead child, and another woman with another pregnancy which has been taken out alive, and that same pregnancy has come out as a dead child. It happens to the child on an aperient long time in his womb; and it is inflated within so that it burns brightly, and begins to sweat.
He was called to the cure of him, and treated for a long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Then you applied to him of some causes plasters of strong attraction, and discharged from him a bone, and then passed some days, and discharged another bone; and I was very surprised, for in the womb there is not a bone.
And then you considered that they were of the bones of the dead child.
Then I cured the plague of him, and extracted from him many bones, for that woman is in her usual dispositions, and I have seen it in such a way for a long time, correct a little bit of the child.
And I did not consider it strange, but it happens that the water is a science and helps to this water which you administer to him for treatment.
of the shapes of the instruments which are necessary to extract the child.
Shape of rotation with which the mother is agitated:
This is the shape of strength in which you wrap the free ends, and with which two rotations are on the two ends of two feet. But perhaps this rotation is not subtle in its strictness, and it is done or with the ear of a boy or with the finger of a girl.
And it is the length of each foot which has two toes and the margin of each one which has a toe, and the length of each is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two toes or a little less.
These two additions are inserted in the mouth of the mother so that she is agitated with these two rotations.
Another similar shape to this which is more subtle and lighter:
Is made of feet of a girl or of a boy according to the appearance of pincers. But perhaps in the end of him are two additions which have been said, and the length of these additions is a palm, and the width of each is two toes.
And when you want to close the mouth of the woman with these, then return her on her back, with water which has been said between her thighs. And then open your mouth with the instrument as much as you want according to the quantity that you want of the impression of the mouth of the mother so that she makes it so that you want.
The form of turn that they said the ancients:
Form of pushing on, which is pushed back:
Form of rubbing on, which is rubbed in the head
And is assembled with forceps that are placed in the end, sometimes, and some are made long sometimes, and sometimes with forceps according to this form, sometimes, and that which is engraved and rubbed and is scraped and is shaped in the hand: Form of little rubbing on:
Form of one that has a point:
Form of one that has two points:
Form of a knife with two ends, which is cut in the head:
Form of two knives long:
All these instruments are exercised, and when many of the spices of that one are mixed and prepared by the artist, how much is applied to the operation and how much men for its quantity.
And of those instruments that are done already, you should be careful, because the need for those is not excusable.
Of extraction of the second.
When the second child is kept, it should be commanded to the bad that he keep his breath, and bring that it cough, and press your hand over its mouth and nose, and if in this way it sneezes, good is it.
And if not, you take a water and pierce in the ceiling a hole and stop it with grass, so that the mouth of the mother is burned, sometimes with cold and rough and wet and chamomile and licorice Arabic and oak and holy water. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cup, and bring it to the fire.
And place a pipe of camomile in the mouth of the mother, and keep it so that the vapor comes into its cavity.
And bring that it coughs, as fast as you can say 'jack robinson', and the second child is forgotten with speed.
And if this cure remains and is not thrown up, command the midwife to dip her left hand in olive oil or mixture of marjoram, and put that on the mother's belly, and try to find the second child, and with that come back found, then take it and squeeze a little little at a time according to this recipe so that the mother does not feel the violent attraction. In front of you that is changed from right to left with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is stopped up, we have already described the cure with sneezing and the medicine of the water with herbs.
If not forgotten with all the causes that we have described, be careful that you do not force it to come out of her mouth, but if it comes out by itself, rub that with honey and four herb, because that will make it boil a little bit and be forgotten.
When it is cooked, it has a bad smell to the head and to the stomach, and that which makes the mother sick; and then put those administered with smoke and suitable smells in water.
Some of the Ancients have already described as smoke-making of the nose and of the dried figs.
Form of a device that the woman is sub-smoked must be commanded to the retention of blood and the second child:
Of vomiting or vomiting.
The end that is subtle is put in the cavity and the wide end is over the fire, and smoke is put on the coals of the fire.
And keep it so that that which is smoked is consumed with smoke, and repeat: another.
Of the cure for a child who has not been pierced.
When children are born but their anuses are not pierced, they are subtle and difficult: Then command the midwife to pierce her anus, and if not, pierce it with a sharp knife, and be careful that it does not touch her liver.
And bring that wrapped wool in the sun and oil; and cure that with honey so that it is bitter.
If you are afraid that it will be pierced, then put a pipe for the child to swallow in its mouth, and stop it so that it does not come out.
And already happens oppilacion of the anus by consolidation of plague or pus; then put that consolidation, and bring those made with water that we have described and with salt.
Of the cure for fistulas that are left.
The fistulas that are left in the anus, put them on a base of ointment and grossness of the kind that comes out through the anus and from the space of one part.
Is this a question? If so, here is the translation:
And with that base, it is old and runs from the white, bitter water or subtle pus, and some of those fistulas are penetrating.
And those that are penetrating are distinguished by the exit and by the windiness; and some times use the exit, and a strong leak comes out of them.
And some of those fistulas are located in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the meat of the thigh; and some of those that penetrate into the joints of the crotch and into the neck of the pelvis.
And in the water that is conoguda is a fistula that penetrates into the anus and does not, then put the child' saying of "end" in the anus, and bring up smoke or iron to the fistula when it is not painful.
If in that is painful, then bring up a little of salt or iron or horse hair inside the fistula where you feel the pain or the hair in the child' saying.
And if you do not feel that pain or any burning inside the pipe or windiness, then know that it does not penetrate, and cure yourself with the cure.
When the fistula enters into the bladder or into the meat of the thigh, then know that the meaning of the water is pee and stop it with medicine when it comes to the place.
If it enters into the joints of the crotch or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then know that the meaning is pee if it does not feel painful, but the water will cause pain in the circulation of the part; and that it will be bitter at times; and that this medicine should not be made with honey.
And in all those fistulas that penetrate, there is no cure for them all, and the treatment of those is difficult and useless work of the medical leaves on which it is closed.
If that one does not penetrate and does not age, cure with salt according to what I have recommended, and in the water that I have already described and practiced.
And that which is made with salt is played between your two legs and raised the intestines of them, and put those in an angle towards the belly of you, and bring up smoke or iron if it is painful to get into a fistula where you know the place.
And if it hurts to turn the patient around, then cover that you are turning the little finger in the armpit.
And if you feel the little finger move when it is already in place, another thing that makes you feel pain between the little finger and the side or flesh, then know for sure that it has penetrated; and then do not work on that, for it is not in that area where there is healing, as we have said.
But some will say that it heals in some people and does not heal in others.
And as for the treatment by which hope is expected to heal him, then you should ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, thus preceded, and introduce that ignites into the fistula until it enters through the armpit; and repeat that two or three times within that you know that they are all tight. These wounds that seem like feathers of an owl.
And then heal that with calmed and wrapped bandages within that all those tissues that are tight can be healed, and then heal that with medicines that cause the creation and consolidation of flesh, and if it is healed, well done; and if not, do not heal it with any other treatment.
And if the tentacle enters and does not penetrate within; the little finger that is in the armpit, and between that and the tentacle that is slightly of flesh or of side, and sometimes the fistula into which it comes when it reaches the surface of the breast, then dry the breast from the beginning of the fistula, and you shall cut off the tentacle, and it be in the fistula within that the cut reaches the place where the end of the tentacle arrives, and with the tentacle is released and discharged.
Then clean those wounded tissues that are assembled like a tube of ink of an owl and do not rust due to some cause.
But if there is a flow of blood several times that comes between you and your work when you are sewing those tissues, then the milk that is and from the pus, a sharp instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicines, for cauterization with fire adjusts well: it is dried up from those tight tissues, and the excessive secretion of fluids.
Then heal that with calmed and wrapped bandages within that place gets swollen, and then heal the plague with burning and drying flesh that is generated and consolidated.
And thus medicines in which there is strictness and excision; when then is restored, it is already healed, and you do not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already entered into the armpit and is extended from the surface of the chest, then put the little finger in the armpit and ask him about it.
And if you feel the tentacle and it is slightly of flesh or of side between you and it, and it is about to penetrate; then do not operate on him in any way except by a trusted and promising route.
The cause is to administer it in any of these three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it within that you can reach the cavity of it so that you can put your fingers into it and apply the appropriate treatment; and not to cut it with a section, otherwise you will injure the lacuna containing the armpit, and it will happen about him as much as he wants; and then heal that with water as we have said because it is strong medicine to heal; or to extend that little flesh and create pus on it that you dry within that you can reach the cavity of it, as we have said, either with a tentacle or with another instrument of an acute tip, and then clean those tissues that are cut within that part within the armpit, and then try to make the restoration of all the plague with a section; and if the pus orifice above does not consolidate, and it breaks the fistula open at the armpit, and the pus leaks through it. And some times the fistula is finished in this way: when you put the tentacle in the fistula, and it is at the back of the armpit on the surface of the chest near the armpit, then take an acute tip, which is thus prepared to prepare the tissues according to this form:
and put it in that calmed wrapped up of four sheets or inside those; and then put the tentacle in the fistula within that you can reach its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the armpit from behind towards the middle, then you take off the calmed wrapped-up of four sheets or inside those; and then put the tentacle in the fistula within that you can reach its cavity. If it is penetrating into the armpit from the side towards the back, then you take off the tentacle from that part
Then heal the plague within that it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you prepare it, except to push it into the armpit, for you will injure the lacuna; and then heal that which is within that it be healed.
The shape of the spike on which the fistula is cut: its curve is sharp and the other end is not-sharp, so that you do not injure it, and this does not matter; sometimes.
Of the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood runs through the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids as if they were between the buttocks, resembling wood, or those are with a thick fat. And of those there are small and large ones, and the blood flows from them at times, and they are one, and they do not hurt; and they are outside the armpits, and in their ends.
But those that are outside the armpits are according to two parts: either they have little humidity, from which runs yellow water or a drop of blood at times, and it is according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the armpit is that you order to the patient that he does not move and squeeze his chest until the hemorrhoids appear. Then you cut them off with your nails or those that you have on your fingers, and then you cut their roots.
But if the nails are not holding in those due to their humidity and softness, then take them with a sharp blade or a nail file or a piece of wool, and cut them with your knife, and then cut off their roots; and you can put them on a sharp edge, and you can cut them from the root, and then powder them over them some powdered herbs, appropriate to cauterize them; or cauterize them according to what we have said before. Then heal those with the other treatment within that they are healed.
And if the buttocks do not obey to go out, then cut the patient with a sharp knife in the place where it hurts slightly; and wash it with water that is inside the armpits and that obeys to go out lightly when you cut the patient.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the armpits, then the cause of them is that you take them with your fingers, or with a blade, and cut them; and then heal those with water as we have said within that they are healed.
And that which you cut must be sutured according to this way: take a calmed wrapped-up of four sheets and put it on the blade and then extract the hemorrhoids with its ends; make the blade penetrate into the roots of the other part, and wrap those two ends in the blade at the end of the incision, and cut off the roots; and then heal them.
And make it known to all of them, and leave one of them unbound, so that the excess blood from the heart may run off from him.
Then place over the buttock a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and place that one on the patient's rear end, and order the servant to rest. Then let him fall into a box; and when he is fallen, treat those with oil or any other cure within the box that may heal them.
And if those old remedies do not work in him, then do so with a pointed stye or your finger, wetting it and applying it to the pustule on top of him, which prohibits the spread of pus from it, and cure those that are already consolidated; and treat those that are already consolidated.
Then do so with a sharp razor to drain the pus that is coming out vigorously from the first wound, and cure those within that are already healed.
You should know that Ailsamiere, as it is said, and unless the color of the body resembles a clove-shaped crown, it is made throughout the whole body, more especially in the toes of the feet and the fingers, and at these places pain should be felt deeply; and because of this pain you should think about your spirit.
And then do so with a sharp razor or oil that is in the circle of the nail, and cut it off completely, and cure him.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes the first in the line of the thumb.
Might a warts be a small, sharp, raised, round blister on the surface of the body, and mottled spots may come out in most children.
And for his cure you should extend and cut off that one, or create that one by a sharp instrument or within the box. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said before, with fire or acute medicine.
Might a wart be a small, flattened, or raised blisters on the skin that itches, and when it scratches that one it stings like a bee sting all over the body.
And for his cure you should take a tube of pena (a type of medicine), or a pen of voltor (another type of medicine), and make it strong, and place that one over the wart that contains it within the circle of the tube of its legs; and then turn your hand upside down with the tube inside, so that the medicine goes into the wound, and place that one on the warts' root, and cut off the wart completely from both sides by the tube.
And if you wish, do so with the tube of iron or steel according to this shape:
May the tube's end be sharp, dull (if not pierced), wrapped with something that covers it from being pierced by it and its rotation around it.
And if you wish, cauterize the wart according to what we have said before in cauterization of atheyl in the line of cauterization.
Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give cure.
Some spots are made of silver or copper or melted era  (a type of metal) or malleated; and some spots are made with small instruments according to those that are used for the cure of small children, as those for the cure of little children are small; and of those for the cure of large children, their shape is larger.
The shape of the cure should be large and few:
May the tube' s end be wide above all things; and may it be distinguished by where the bag is tied.
And the end of the tube be slightly pointed, which is inserted into the buttock, be dull (if not pierced) and turning back on itself; and on one side of the line of the tube there are two turns, and on the other side a turn, and may the turn be wider according to the thickness of the rays and a small one.
May the bag in which are placed the medicines of animal or sheep' s hair be wide; and may the root of the tube be a palm.
May it be pierced by sharp turns as it is turned over; and may the space between the turns be wider according to the thickness of the tongue.
And then insert it into the sharp turns of a firm thread, which is to be found in the bag, or between those; and adjust the bag to that one; and when it is placed on his head, may the bag be straight between two distinct and tight constriction, and then apply the cure to each turn: May the quality of applying the cure to that one be that you fill the bag with medicine, which is heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and be careful not to be too long or too short.
And then the patient is to be made to sit down on his heels, and his feet lifted up on a chair or a bench; and then the minister takes the bag and squeezes it with two hands and spills its contents quickly into the cure; and then pour the cure out and take the bag and fill it again according to what is required for another turn; and then place the cure on the wall.
And if the medicine forces that one to sleep, hold as much as you can; and if it sleeps at night, it is a medicine of healing.
May if you apply the cure to those suffering from stomach trouble and sleeping at night, then do so with a cure that heals.
And if there are hemorrhoids or sore breasts in the buttock, then apply a cure that is sharp and pointed, which is used for children's cures.
Of Cure of Plaies.
You have already said in the division of Cure of Plaies that it is appropriate to apply with the hand, and I will say as it is done with the hand and medicine according to the compliment.
Therefore, I say that plagues are different according to where they are caused and according to the place on which they fall.
And the causes of the stings that cause plagues are as follows: from pepper; from sharp weapons such as knives, spears, and arrows; from sharp things such as needles; or from a sharp blow of the hand.
May plagues that are in the body be as follows: from a sting on the head; or on the neck; or on the chest; or on the belly; or on the feet; or on the hands; or on the arms; or on the legs; or on the back; or on the genitals.
I recommend the cure for some plagues that you should apply to all of them, and reason and consider about those other plagues.
I will begin with the simple plagues, as the reminiscence of composed things will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and is not broken, then consider: if it is from pepper or injection; and the hand has been cut, you should take care of yourself quickly, and drink water as soon as possible; and draw it out of the holy water according to its value; but do not delay doing so; and draw it out of the water of healing according to its worth if there is no reason for the drinking of the holy water; especially if the plague that has come out from the head is small.
And so is flabbotomy done on the opposite side of the infected part; and keep the patient from repleteness, and from food and heavy foods.
If by carefulness you prevent any cause, then do lessen the food and don't bring it near meat or wine.
And put over the plague, if to him occurs an apoplexy, a pointed cautery, burn in red oil alone or in wine that is made stiff.
But if you are sure of the apoplexy, then put over the plague, if it is recent, pour a little water on it and don' do so if the powder that I will recommend to you has not dried up.
And if the air has already changed that, then put over it on a hot plate until it is healed.
But if the plague is great or is by cut of flesh and of resemblance, and the lips of it are not adjusted for puvis, then adjust those with sutures according to what I recommend for their suturing.
But if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and is penetrative, and there is not a small suspension of it but a great one, then cut that out and promptly heal the plague with medicines and restore the flesh to its place instead of coden, and order the patient that he eat food in which there are roots and of resemblance to him, until it has recovered: and let them eat fish and meat.
And if the putrefaction in the coden does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all of it and burn it, and promptly heal it.
But if in these plagues is an artery or a vein from which blood can flow, and it does not heal with medicine, then you will inquire about the artery, and if that one has not healed, then cut it off or ligature it; and if necessity forces you so that you do not confer it, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is dust; therefore, you will put this powder on them, because it has hardened them before the air changes them.
And the way of this powder is this: prepare an oil from half a part of sage, from two parts of dragon's blood, and from three parts of an unspecified substance; all of it should be well shaken and sieved, and if there is plague in it, it will be bound by good constriction until it has hardened on it; and it will be coagulated with the blood.
Then apply that powder on it and let it rest, and don' do so while it is still apoplectic, because it will not be healed by medicine while it is in that state.
Then make water only with cautery, when it is neither on you nor has sage and dragon' blood in it.
Then make this operation on the great plagues when you have to put it on them and let them be well-bound, and only on recent plagues that the air has not altered.
But if the air has altered them, and mainly when it is in summer, then do not put this powder on them, but promptly heal those with water that we have said, or if you put on them cold ointment mixed with oil; and promptly heal them with another cure until they are healed.
But if by chance there is fracture of the bone due to plague, and it is small, then extract the bone's water with a gesticulator.
And direct the cure for fractures on the head in venenous water.
For col plagues.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, then it does not matter to you in medicine, and between head plagues when they are simple.
But if the neck's nerves are cut or are arteries, then if it is a nerve, don' put on it any medicine with violent stinginess; let them not be burned and not be stung as it were a vinegar and of resemblance to them because they do not burn the nerves but contract that one. And don' put on them any medicine because of their frequent movement, for the substance of the nerves is頻繁 and continuous with the neck, which is the pus of all members.
And if it is washed with medicine that makes one feel better, then wash it with double water, and pour hot oil on the back; and let it be well-bound with ointment.
But if the plague is great, then administer sutures or bind the lips with a bandage, and promptly heal it with powder until it is healed.
But if the plague has depth or occurs in the pus that has become corrupted, then pierce it at the deepest part.
But if in the plague there is an artery that has been penetrated by blood flow, then separate it or dry it up, or cut it off, or cauterize it if necessity forces you to water.
But if the groins have already been cut completely, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you will adjust the lips of the coden with sutures on the can of the groins and don' touch that; also cut that one off from its natural shape, and bind it tightly with a bandage, and let them heal with ointment in which there is stinginess and excitement until it is healed.
But if the plague has already begun to eat the bone, then beat that one, and if there are any fractures of bones, extract them all that you can; and if it is not worn out, let it heal until the plague corrupts it; separate and make a hole in it, so that its blood may be drained.
But if the plague is recent, then apply on it the powder that I have recommended to you. But if the plague has opened a fistula, then heal it with water in which the cure will come back to its head.
If it is a noise of a lance or a sword, and its depth is times of three, then consider whether by the patient' moaning there is any wind; then know that the plague is deadly.
But if it is not deep and the plague is recent from the patient' side, then you will apply on him the first powder at first hour; and do not tighten it so that the blood does not go to his heart and make a pulse in his body; but let them leave two veils of the day.
But if the ointment is not present with you, then apply on the opening of the plague a ring with oil so that it sucks water which has in it; and make the patient sleep on the plague so that it runs water which is in it.
But if three days or more have passed since the plague occurred and there is no spasming of the patient or trembling of the heart or stricture of speech, then know that the plague is saved; and then heal it with calo and with another cure until it is healed.
But if the patient' cure has been postponed and it has been open for a long time, then know that it has already opened a fistula; so heal it with his own head.
But if the plague is by cut of a knife or a lance and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the hand, then heal it with water preceded by sutures if it is great, or with powder if it is small.
If there is already damage to the bones and the feet are already separated, then you should twist the foot and put a bandage on it to extract the separated parts. If they are not yet separated, then leave them as they are so that the foot can heal, for it is a relief to extract them.
And of the other injured limbs, healing in treatment is the same as that which we have said.
Of abdominal wounds.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is great, little, or moderat.
For a small number of the intestines and nerves, it is made difficult in another way; and if you do not avoid their interference with each other at its location so often, for fear that it becomes open and thick because of the instrument, it is difficult to reduce them.
And therefore the best course is moderat; for although it is not difficult to reduce the small intestines, it is difficult in two of the species mentioned before.
And you should know that there are four ways to stitch the abdomen; two common stitches are used, which correspond to the stitches of the other limbs of the body.
And two others that are proper to themselves communicate with the other limbs; but they are used only in the treatment of the abdomen.
I recommend to you each exposure and explanation.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of it in the intestines by that, and it is difficult to reduce it: either because of the smallness of the disruption, as I have said before; or when the intestines are swollen by cold air.
And therefore, when it is like that, I say that you should cut it in such a way that you do not hurt it; but that you dip one sponge or cloth in cold water alone, or that you take some water from the river, and cypress, and spices, and immerse them in the intestines before the swelling is resolved.
Some wounds make water appear on their surface due to the stinging, and it is better than cold water alone in resolving swelling.
And therefore, when you see the swelling resolved, then dip the intestines in water that is already hot and cold; for by water they are relieved from a few causes.
If the instrument is not suitable for this treatment, then you should cut the disruption into small pieces with an instrument in which hemorrhoids are inserted.
The first treatment is best when it is not necessary to cut off anything; and it is not appropriate to use it for the sake of drying out at all.
Regarding the instrument, let us consider its shape:
The one side of the instrument is acute and the other is not acute, and at its end it is subtle; but not too subtle, for its edge to be blunt; a little sharp.
And when the wound is large and the intestines are outside: let us consider that its reduction should be according to the natural shape of the instrument; in its place, if possible on top of it; for it is better.
But when the disruption is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen: let us consider that you place the patient lying on their back; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place the head higher than the legs.
And apparently if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should pause your intention and consideration for some time so that the part where the wound is can be higher than the other.
And thus consider that you administer water in the large wounds and in the small wounds.
And in the small wounds, pause the water that is at your disposal; and arrange for the minister to be between your five fingers, which should hold the whole wound together and adjust its edges; and discover which is the cause of the stitch in addition to any other causes.
This is the common way to stitch: one that takes the needle and considers the amount of the wound's width; and arrange the edge of the disruption of the little finger, and tighten the needle; and you should not insert the needle into the two extremities of the thread, but rather let them hang loose from the two extremities of the knot, keeping them in place so that they do not come apart; and you have added two extremities to the thread and made four orders.
And arrange the double knot in the thread's circuit, and in some wounds of two parts together, and add the two lips to the wound by addition; and arrange the thickness of the thread and fasten another needle in it; and place that one on top of the first; and do not stop making water if necessary while you are completing the whole construction of the wound.
And let the small needles be between subtlety and thinness, for the thin needles cut the flesh with difficulty; and the thick ones are difficult to knot in the thread, so that by water they become both thin and thick.
And I do not know why the needle should be fastened to the two extremities of the thread, so that the flesh is not cut with difficulty and the wound does not open; but rather so that the wound may heal before its consolidation.
And do not make the stitches long, lest the wound should not heal with consolidation.
And arrange the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps on his side; and place them on the swellings of all parts, which should hold the two ends of the thread; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has healed with consolidation.
And these kinds of stitches with needles are most convenient in small wounds; because they only require one needle or two or three to stitch.
But the second stitch is similar: and it is that you administer the four ends, of the thread and two extremities of the needle, in one wound; with a needle which should be wrapped up on itself with thinness and thickness.
And when the needle has penetrated through these four ends, reduce it by a half-part of the needle with which you began; so that the thread comes back from the upper part to the lower one in the wound, so that the stitch is according to the stitch of cloth and not too long.
And pause between each stitch the thickness of half a needle thread.
And this stitch pleases men.
And at this stitch I found the cause of the wound which had befallen a man in his abdomen, who had been struck by a knife, and it was the rupture of the small intestine from two palms of the small intestine near its own location, and it was the disruption of the middle part of that member; and afterwards I reduced it after twenty-two hours.
And the wound healed in the space of fifteen days or so, and he recovered and his speech was restored to him; and he began to talk about his affairs again.
And the other limbs had healed without being cured; and by a miracle it healed, for I did not cure him with any herb, because that was not the place where herbs are found or medicine administered; but I applied cool water to the wound daily and washed it thoroughly with water until it healed.
There are two kinds of sutures for sewing up according to the words of the Parable.
And you begin sewing with the thread from above, and insert the needle from the outside in through the inside.
And so with the needle penetrating into the thread and in that place of sewing straight and long from all over the piece, and leaving the end of the knot on it in which you have inserted the needle; and let the needle penetrate into the other side from inside out through the other side of the piece, holding the thread.
And so when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration from the opposite side of the piece from inside out; and leave the end of the knot on it, and let the needle penetrate into the other side from inside out through the other side of the piece, holding the thread.
And make that penetration into the knot at which you made that penetration in the thread from the inside out; and let the needle penetrate into the other side from inside out through the other side of the piece, holding the thread.
And then begin from that side and cut with the thread on the other side of the knot, and draw out the needle from the knot, and then tie up the knot again, and cut the thread on the other side of it.
And so make a cut and another; and so make a cut and another, within that which is opposite to that example.
And the whole of this way of suturing is that you sew on the skin in a way that the skin is sewed; and that you cut the knot from one side of the thread and leave it on the other, and make another cut within that which is opposite to that example.
The second kind of suture is proper to the surgery of Goliahtz, and this way of doing it is that you sew with one thread which does not go around; and that you add a length from his back to its front, and apply the end of one part to another side of him by nature; and apply the other end of the piece to that other part, and do as I have instructed you.
Then take the needle and put it into the tip of your hand from the outside in through the inside, and leave two ends of the knot; and then turn the needle around and make that penetration from the outside in through the inside of the piece twice, leaving the end of one knot, and the other end of the piece.
Then turn those cushions around, and make that penetration twice from the inside out; and let the needle go from one side of the piece to another, going through both sides, and turning around the needle.
This way of suturing is better than common simple suture, and this is a kind of suture from which I have remembered.
This is the language of Goliahtz.
And this is the name given to that kind of surgery: when a person has to be sewed in their belly, you should use two needles, and begin with a thread; and insert the needle from one side, which should go around; and make that penetration into the other side according to the suture of those who sew limbs together.
And you must know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, this kind of surgery is more difficult than other places of the belly.
The treatment for gout is the same as for the other types of gout.
That is caused when you get gout suddenly before the rain, and reduce the hernia and sew it up nicely; then place a poultice on that area of inflammation.
If the air has already changed the gout, then place a poultice on that area of inflammation and make it soft with powder; let it settle down and join together the skin and the flesh; and then cure it as you do for other types of gout, until it is healed.
But if you do not have any medicine, then wait for it to get worse, because it starts to hurt; change that part of the skin every day; and let it heal as I instruct you, because you will not need other medicines in this case when gout is simple.
But if you fear that gout may spread to the main limbs, then submerge wool in oil that is wet, or in rose water; and place that between the joints and leave it there.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your hernia, because it is visible; then apply a white stinging substance there, and more so if the putrefaction has reached the hernia and is causing an ulcer to form inside.
And you must know that a large hernia is caused by pus, which can heal; but a smaller one is not caused by pus and will not heal.
It is difficult to heal because the hernia that is called "gegunu" does not receive gout, which enters into it from everywhere; and this is because there are many veins in it, and its size is large, and its subtlety is great, and its proximity is close to nerves.
But if what you are treating is indeed gout, and you get it recently, then reduce the hernia as you do for other things that need reducing.
But if it has passed into the space and is already swollen or black, then put a thread on that area with the needle; for so there will come blood from the wound, because in the hernia are veins and arteries.
And then turn that other part of the thread around; and place two ends of the knot hanging from the side opposite to the hernia, so that it is relieved from your body by the pressure of the knot; and let it hang there, taking away the tension of the skin and emission of the brac of the hernia.
Remembering gout when it occurs in the hernia.
When disruption occurs in the hernia and it is small, it is possible that it was caused by a lance; because I have seen that one which was struck on the right side of the belly with a lance, and it was gout from that part; and it had already begun to form an ulcer, and had become rotten, and its discharge and gas were coming out.
Then I instructed that treatment should be continued until it is healed; but in the meantime, make it subtle where it was; and then the place will be consolidated.
And I have seen that place has already been consolidated, then wait for it; do not eat or drink anything bad that causes these accidents in the belly of a person who has them, and let it rest there; but get into baths and exercise regularly.
And some experienced people have said that when there is gout in the hernia and it is small, then bind it according to this method: and this is because you take from large cheese; and then fasten the two sides of the hernia together and place a thread between them; and then tie the knot of those, because they do not dissolve.
And then place another form between the first one, and do not stop there from making more; and make each form according to the amount of gout.
And then reduce that hernia and sew it up; and those heads are tied together in the hernia, until the hernia is healed; and do not let it cause any harm.
And it is also possible that the hernia be attached to a thin string from the animal's hernia, because it is sharp; and it is because you hold the end of such hernia strings, and it is very lean, and you attach the end of it to a string of leather, wrapped, and you insert that string into needles and sew with it like that hernia, and reduce that in rupture.
And this way of sewing with worms is only a second way of trust and hope.
But if the pain is great and widespread, most likely it is in one of the thin hernias, because when there is little pain, there is no improvement; but there is no healing of any of them.
Of cure for hernia and fistula.
Know that all sore and suppurating wound, when it is covered and dried up, and does not heal and put out a branch at all times, and does not dry up, it is called universally a fistula, and we call it a hernia.
And a fistula in truth is a hollow vessel, hard, white, where there is no pain and to which the cavity has been made with pain; and for this it is called an alcos, that is, a pain.
And in the case of men who are wet, which puts out a branch, and very strong the moisture is discharged in a few hours. And some of this moisture is moved, it is little, it is thick, and it is thin.
He already shown all these causes, and they are distinguished from those, and the cure of them by medicines in the division.
And so that you know how to cure a fistula, which is made by surgery.
Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; because they come to the veins, large and small arteries, or nerves, or lymphatic vessel, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or both sides of the shoulder blade and chest, and similar places near the main member and the hand; and of those which cause pain in the proximity of the main member and the hand.
And therefore of all these fistulas, the one according to this method is of difficult healing and no cure; it occupies and consumes effort and ignorance.
And if it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach those places that are said, and you wait and trust in the healing of it, and want to come to know it, then take a knife or a needle, and if the fistula goes according to surgery, and inquire about it.
But if the fistula is a tortuosity, then investigate it with a thin lead, because lead, with its lightness of movement in the body, will be helped to follow that tortuosity.
And if the fistula has moved a great deal, it is impossible for you to know about it by trying.
Then you will open the orifice with a sharp instrument, because the moisture with which you have closed that opening must go through other openings and flow out.
Then you will question carefully, according to which method it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves; and it is the cavity of the fistula far away or near, or a fistula that has only one orifice and lies over it all, throughout your entire strength, through your interrogation, in which you interrogate the patient, and from which you invent the pain. You will compress it with your hand on the spot, and similar things to the causes and accidental events of the swelling.
And when you have stood on all these things with certainty, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is because you consider that if it is a fistula, it appears close or in a place of salt, far from a joint, or nerves, or artery, or vein, or any of the places that I have told you.
Then dry up the fistula according to what has been said before in the description of it; and let this water go into that filtration and from rotten flesh, and let it come from a hole in the flesh, or similar things, and heal it so that it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth, and it is according to surgery, then you will open it as much as possible, and you will clean all its corrupted flesh; and you will put sharp medicine inside it, and insert it into the cavity of the fistula, which you have examined with a sharp instrument.
Then put it in that opening, a few days later, so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with an ointment with which you generate healthy flesh within that is healed.
But if it is not healed by water, then you will cauterize it according to what we have said.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone, and it is necessary to make a cut according to what we have said; if you do not prohibit any cause of a vein or a nerve or a main member, then ask about it and dry it up according to our instructions.
But if the bone is at your disposal and it is in all corruption and darkness, then you will cut open that part of the flesh where the corruption is complete; and you will heal it with water so that it is healed.
And if it is not healed and gets better with the water, then you will know that you have not come to the complete eradication of corruption; and then you will discover carefully about what causes it, and thoroughly clean it, and then restore it.
And so if it is healed, it is good; but if not, you will know that the corruption is in the depth far from the body, which has not been achieved, and then work on it.
And if the bone is corrupt in a small part, or is at your disposal to throw it; then you will throw it with very thin tweezers, which is appropriate for this purpose and with water.
And if it is many bones, then carefully remove all of them, and leave none behind that could be a cause for your strength.
But if you have an opposite cause of moisture, and in the incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those layers or meats if they are here, and release the bones.
But if you have not prepared to tie up the bones of your patient with a string, then hold it above the pain that you can find; and leave that opening that is in the vicinity of those bones of meat and layers, and keep the pain where it cannot be consolidated, and the incision that you made in your operation.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
If it is a large bone, let it be with the back or with the hips or similar to those; and what comes out of it is the face of it alone, then put that black and corruption back into it, and restore the poultice.
If what comes out of it is a great piece, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then close it completely within the place where the corruption entered; then heal it inside so that it may be solid.
And I recommend to you that he go to a man in his thighs to help him hold it and assist you in your operation.
A young man of about thirty years, to whom pain occurs in the thigh, and internal splints are increased within the body's shell until the material enters the thigh, and it is material from pus; it does not come from an external cause.
And then I extended the time for it by the error of the doctors until the pus became more abundant, and then the material was moved, and its cure was delayed until the back was broken, and small orifice were made everywhere, all of which gave pain and the body's moisture.
And then many doctors treated him for two years, but he did not get better in the art, until I was called.
I saw how the back was broken and how the material ran out of those orifices for a great distance; and that man's body was completely weak, and its color was yellow.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices and penetrated the probe into the bone.
Then I examined the orifices closely, and I found that they came from all parts of the back.
Then I hid myself and cut open one of the orifices where I discovered a piece of bone that was completely rotten, and it had turned yellow and black; and one piece of the back had already become rotten where it had penetrated into the pelvis.
Then I tightened what was on me, which had been discovered and prepared from the bone.
I saw that it was not in the bone but the corruption which I had cut open and tightened; and I had already removed it.
Then I put back the poultice with solidifying medicine for a long time, but it did not solidify.
Then I went back and discovered the bone again on the first discovery, and there was continued corruption to the bone.
I tightened what came out of me, and then I put in place the cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
Then I discovered another piece on the other side and did not cut open the bone little by little and put in place the cure, but I extracted its marrow; then I healed it with medicines, and it solidified a little and was healed.
There is no need for repetition in the operation of it and cutting it open, but because of the urgency of the matter and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, since it occurs at all times due to excessive elimination of bad breath.
And so it was healed completely, and there is nothing in its place of hard bone; and it returns to its virtue; and it has been established in its place, and does not cause any pain or discomfort in walking or in any other way for any reason.
If the bone is prominent in place of the body, then do this according to this method: and that you carefully hold that at the end of that bone; and order someone to extend it further; and carefully take out a thick piece of wool from the first piece; and put that piece over the flesh that is left of the bone, and extend the end of it so that it may come off the place where you want to cut it; and discover the flesh under that piece so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
Then place a table or board on both sides of the bone, for when you make that cut it is not forbidden to cut the rotten flesh.
Then carefully place the saw on that place little by little, because if it is in the concave part of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and force the cut again on another side.
If the bone is rotten and not prominent, then move one piece continuously towards the other, and the corruption is in its place or in another part; then you discover all the flesh; and then place it on both sides, and cut that piece where the corruption is so that it may continue to be cut on the other side.
Then carefully place the saw according to the location of the corruption; a little bit is enough, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut that joint that is rotten, and cut the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but in danger.
And if the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, if you ask about the corruption in which way it appears to you, and if you cut that piece, and do that according to each case as is possible for you, and according to each possibility is corrected for you, so that it does not cause any pain or discomfort in walking or in any other way.
You know what is necessary to cut these bones, and the tools that are suitable for this operation; prepare them according to each case, and be careful in preparing them, and pay attention to their size and subtlety and their greatness and their smallness and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare all kinds of operations with specialized instruments.
You know that this operation requires you to have the right instrument; and you are a great student and patient and aware of the ways of this art, and a witness to the consequences of mistakes, since you have already experienced them in yourself through what has been done to you; so choose wisely the instrument that is suitable for all cases.
And I will teach you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you can use with ease, and with which you will deal with your prohibition, which you will experience on other people. To cut bones, one needs a sharp saw. The saw should be able to cut through the bone easily and smoothly. One should choose a saw that is appropriate for the size of the bone and the area where the cut needs to be made. The saw should also be clean and oiled before use. It is important to make slow and steady cuts, applying gentle but firm pressure. One should avoid over-exerting force, as this may cause damage to the surrounding tissues.
Other form of the saw:
Other great form of the saw:
Form of a ream: The shape of this ream is according to the form of the star-shaped head, and the points of it are according to the form of the points asterged.
And they should not be used unless the joints are crushed when rotten, or if the large mouth is open wide.
Form of the smaller razors:
Form of the lateral razors:
Other form of saw in a decent way: It should be made of the iron wire and its edges sharp, and the member of it pointed decently. Form of it:
Form of the razors in which there is a cavity:
Other subtle form of razors:
Other form of curved razors at the extreme end:
Form of small razors resembling a tentacle:
Other smaller form of incisions:
Form of another incision; resembling a saw, and its end is like a chisel, and it is displayed in the motion of the bones:
Form of a saw that corresponds to the perforation of the bones:
And its end is triangular and has an acute point.
It is made of Indian iron, and resembling a curve that all the causes that we have said of razors, and of incisors and saws.
Of incision extremes and the locking of the bones.
The extremities can be cured either by intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you treat those medicines and the cure does not confer with them, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member that does not hit any cause, then it is said that you cut off that member within which the corruption occurs, so that the badness of the member escapes through water of death or of malice which is greater in destruction of the member.
And the sign of that member that happens to you is that it is made black within which it is said that fire has burned it, or it is burned close to the blackness of that one within that member that burns it and takes all the body; and therefore you should cut off that member.
It is said that if it is caused by the corruption of a poisonous impact of some causes such as of a scorpion, or of an owl, or of a weasel, and resembling:
And if the corruption or impact is in the end of that, then you cut off that one and do not give space to the corruption so that it goes on to the main body.
And if it happens to the main body, then you cut off that one from the fire's edge, and do not give space to the corruption so that it takes hold in the fire of the arm.
And if you instead of that one, then cut off the arm at the junction.
And if the corruption passes from that one and surrounds the junction, then the death of the patient is certain; and other causes are added to that one in cure, which quantity of virtue.
It is said that if corruption happens to the foot instead of that one, then you cut off that foot from a knuckle; and:
And if it takes hold in the angle of the foot, then you cut off all the foot. May also be within the knee, then you cut off the knee joint.
And if corruption has already taken hold on the knee, then it is only to be cut off, and let the patient die.
And the way of incising the member or sawing it is that you strengthen the joint in the part where you want to cut, and strengthen another joint over that location; and extend the minister a joint to the split parts, and extend another joint on them; and you separate the meat which is between two joints in such a way that all of the meat is exposed; and it is incised or sawed.
And as soon as you cut off the joint completely so that it does not touch the location, and bring to the patient's injury a correct apothecary and blister.
May also happen to you a flux of blood when it works, then you cauterize the location carefully, or pour on it some powders that restrain the blood; and return to your medicine as soon as possible.
And tie up the troubled member with a strong joint, and cure that one within which it is healed.
And I will tell you that in an old man's foot, this accident which is said to have happened to him is due to the heat of a fire, and it is said that he is not able to walk.
That corruption first happened in his foot while it was extended.
And then that man prepared himself for this purpose that the cure would come to the member with the urgency of his pain and the rustling of him, and he cut off that foot at the junction, and fire healed it.
Long time ago, an accident happened to him in his leg while he was walking:
And then he came to me, and so I repaired myself by applying those medicines to the body of him, according to his need; and that superfluity did not recur to me, and I began to apply it in another leg which had begun to hurt in my body.
And he called me to cut off his body, and I did not want to do so in the hope of preventing that superfluity from recurring to him, but rather I killed him first, because the virtue of the patient was over death.
And then he left me in peace, and he returned to his own land, and I healed him by cutting off all of his body, and it was healed.
And I will not add to this story unless it is helpful for me to explain what this malady means and how it relates to the other; and according to that I will speak.
Of cures, their qualities, and the use of blistering.
When an apothecary is applied to large joints of the body and the blister is extended within that location, then it is broken and pierced, and the blisters are opened by applying a soft cloth, and it does not spread to the bone or to the nerves or joints; it is called a pimple, and it is not called a fistula.
May also be if the space is prolonged before the corruption goes forward to some member, then it is called a fistula; and it does not get worse.
The cure of it is that you cut off all of the blister as it is coming out, and mainly when it is softened and cut with a cloth, and confirm that it does not stick to the location because of its corruption.
May also be if you hope that the blister will adhere and that the corruption has not spread to the next location, and in the blister is opened from the back, then you heal it with blistering.
And consider the skin, and if it is large, and the arm that you hold is of a fetid odor, then cut it with an Egyptian medicine consisting of oil, vinegar, and honey; let it be split into two parts, and let them be tied on a board, and let them be placed over fire so that the medicine becomes robust and spreads to the skin.
And you give him this water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey; then clistenize his sinews, and tighten the orifices of his body, and leave the medicine in him for two hours.
And remove that with waste; and make water for so many days within that it purifies the sinews and restores the humors.
And some are clistenized with ash water, when you do not present this medicine to him; and it is because you take the ash of wine, and put on it water; and clistenize that within him so that he tells you that the sinews will go away then.
And if the patient does not have tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then clistenize that with honey water and mixed zingiber three times, and clistenize that with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinews adhere, and most when there is excess of stipticity and dryness.
And when you make water a few times and are convinced that the sinews have been restored, then clistenize that with water that makes the flesh come out of him.
And it is because you take dyaphinic ointment and dissolve that with rose water and wine stiptic; or you clistenize that with some medicines and ointments that already have the properties that I have written in the treatise of ointments.
And if the orifices of the sinews are narrow in which the canal of the clisteric does not enter, then you widen that little by little, and pause it with a little envelope of Egyptian ointment or basilic ointment so that it is widened.
And if the orifices are wide, then you add a stitch to his lips and leave the quantity in which the clisteric is added.
And if the orifice of his leg that runs up to the thigh is high in the middle of it, then dry that place with a hole that is in him so that the leg runs into it, because when the leg is constricted in the sinew's thickness, the flesh is raised up.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinew within the area of the bone according to your will, then pierce that member with preparation so that the leg runs out smoothly according to what is appropriate for your clothing and does not hold back the leg for any reason.
And remove that which is on the orifice of the sinew, which you restore in all hours so that it does not hurt that leg. And so that you know if the water that runs from his leg is much or little, or whether it digests or does not digest.
And consider the place of that sinew on him, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in apoplexy.
And when your medicine is prolonged in such a way, and you see the matter that is adhering to the orifice of the sinew already adheres, or appropriates adherence, then change the cloth after two days, and when you change the cloth, replace it with another and renew the ointment.
May if from the sinew comes a long thin virus, then do not despair of the adherence to him, because the cure appropriates itself, for such men there is a generation of flesh in their joints plagues, and of those is made the opposite.
And if from the sinew comes a lot of days' indigest leg, then you know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinew is prolonged, then adjust in desiccation of medicines, and if those medicines are wet in their substance and virtue, then they are dried with ointment of dyaphinic, when there is a surplus of addition of zigi.
And the following to cure him is that you take ointment of dyaphinic and dissolve it in rose oil, and put on him wine of stiptic in its substance, and use that; and use it on him.
And it already makes a similar thing, when there is no leg, ointment of dyaphinic, honey when it is thick inside that it be thick, and use that; or you take myrrh and aloe and knead it, and triss all and powder it over the cloth, and pour water on it over a cloth, and tighten that on the sinew; and pour the honey that has gathered inside, and powder over the cloth, and tighten it.
And some are given him long Aristotle and razines of celestial lily (and it is the lily celestial) and flour of eres and centaurea, and use those simple or adjust them, and triss those and sift them and powder over the honey that has been remembered; and use that.
And if the sinew is prolonged, and does not heal with this cure, then you know that the corruption is in its head, and has already been made an investigation in the bones or in other hard members; then you treat it with a cure of fistular, such as when the sun rises.
Of cure of paronychia and scraped nails and cutting the finger added and sectioning.
Paronychia is an apoplexy that does not separate the nail of the toe from the foot of the hand or from the leg, and strongly hurts it in the other toes; and when it is prolonged and its cure is a painful thing, or is an apoplexy of apoplexia, or is corrupted, and the nail is cut, and strongly hurts that whole, and strongly changes the color of it.
And therefore when you have that water which we have said in the division and do not find your cure, then remember to remove all the surplus of the nail and cut it with water; because cauterization is helpful in plagues.
May if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, and the additions of the nail have already affected the flesh at its beginnings, and it begins to hurt and it hurts those, then remember that you pause a thin thread from the angle of the nail that hurts the flesh, and push that above; and push the flesh above and cut it with ease; and pause over that water from the medicine that burns corrosively so that it is all healed; and cure that with ointment.
May if corruption has already entered the bone, then remember to remove that bone and extract it, for no time is cured that is not in its bone corrupted.
And if corruption and corruption go into the finger, then you cut that in one of the nuts according to what is appropriate for its memory; and cure that within that it be healed.
If however the nail has been struck by a hammer or an awl, and there is great pain in it, then when you begin to bleed the patient, dry the nail with a sharp scissor cut across it from above, and take care that the cut does not go into the flesh which is underneath the nail, for you would make more severe pain in the patient and cause the birth of excess flesh at that site; and then treat that site with water which softens the pain.
Then put it on a flat surface, which is born in the flesh of most people, very firm is the flesh everywhere, and very firm is the bone, or very firm is the nail.
And some of them are born in the root of a joint, or their birth is in some nuts from this. Then that which is born in some nuts of the above is not bad, and that which is born in joints is very hard to be cut.
And of those that are born flesh, the cut is light, and it is because you cut the root of this with a sharp scissor.
Then from that which is born in the root of a joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore you should guard against the cutting off of it.
Then from those nuts of the above, when you begin to cut the flesh of it with a round scissors into the bone, and then tie it up with one of those cords to water, and then treat that inside which is healed.
Then the consolidation which happens to these between certain muscles or by the birth of a person who has not yet been born, or by the consolidation of plague or by fire, or by similarity, so that you dry up that consolidation within which those things return to their natural form.
Then leave between them, or a leaf of lead between them, so that it is not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or leave between them a thin layer of lead within which is consolidated as needed.
And if consolidation happens in some nuts by the palm, then you dry up that consolidation according to what it is prepared and adapt it to the form of the limb.
Of scissor cuts, such are varicose veins.
Then such are varicose veins, and those are thick veins full of superfluous melancholy blood which comes to the legs, and most of all in the legs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Then you administer a purge of black cholera several times a day by strong vomiting, and then draw blood from the patient's basilic vein.
Then the cure of them by iron is according to two ways: one is that it be cut and that black blood be drawn from it, and the other way is that it be raised and all that blood be drawn out.
Then the cutting of it is according to this way: immerse at the beginning the foot in cold water so that black blood is resolved, which is ferment from the foot, and then tighten the foot of the patient with a bandage at the top of the foot up to the toe, and then dry the vein in one, or two, or three places by cutting it wide, and then raise the black blood to the top of the foot up to the toe, and then take out the same quantity that you want and which is sufficient for the medicine, and that tolerates the power of the patient.
Then you prepare it, and order to him that he abstains from black cholera-producing foods.
Then the cure is by bleeding when veins are filled with blood, and feel the patient.
Then the raising of them is according to this way: you that you rub the foot of the patient, if it is wet with water, and then immerse the foot in a bath and dry the foot with a cloth so that it cools off and the veins swell; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not at your disposal, so that the limb is scarred.
Then dry the vein on the right side of the blood vessel by cutting it from behind to the front or from the back to the front of it, or cut it at the top or bottom of it with a sharp scissor.
Then cut the vein with nails and squeeze the vein from all parts until it appears on the surface, and it is necessary that that blood be black.
Then therefore you empty, and of that vein sometimes that white thread is drawn out.
Then you take off that bandage so that it is lifted and taken away from the vein, and suspend that with an orange-colored cord.
Then you dry another cut near that cut, and then squeeze the vein from above the vein where it appears.
Then you raise that and cut it from behind where the vein appears at the top of it, and then take out that from the second cutting where it appears, and then take out that from the cutting which is above it.
Then draw that out where you take it out of the second cutting which is higher or lower than all the cuts, so that all of it is taken out; and then cut it.
Then if you do not obey me in taking out and raising it, then insert a double sharp hook into the vein with force and take it out, or turn the patient's hand over completely so that it is raised. Then take care that it is not cut; for if it is torn, then it is difficult to lift that part and it comes back on the foot by that wound.
Then when all of it is taken out, then you leave that place where plague lies in water and oil red and not red, and cure that inside which is healed.
Then if the wine is contracted by tortuosity on which those parts are wrapped, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then when you cut that completely at all parts of that tortuosity and those sites where those things are wrapped, and then suspend that with nails so that it is raised completely.
Then you take care that your cutting of the vein does not hurt it and do not wound that, for it is difficult to lift that; and then serve your prudence in that.
Form of the Scissor which is Dried Wine:
It is not at your disposal accuti with nails, or it is of acute extremities so that the vein does not plague; and it is of coarse flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein because of its subtility; it has superfluous coarseness in this way as well.
Of Vein Ex extraction
This vein is generated in the legs in tail-like shapes so that it is not at your disposal, as we have said, and in Arab lands and arid lands of little moisture and where there is no grass or shade.
Then very firm is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Then the conception of it is from decay which comes from within the body, as we have said, and from snake-like, worm-like, scaly, and vermin-like things that are generated between the vein and the flesh.
Then the indication of the coming of it is from this vein which happens in the foot with violent swelling; and then that place is irritated; and then the vein swells from that place which seems like a root of a plant.
And then bring out the end from him and cover it with a silver ring of which the weight is one dragon from two dragons, and let it hang from the chest.
And when you see any cause of the matter outside, wrap it in plumm and now take that. And if it is prolonged, then you shall incise a part of the leg and wrap it around; and do not incise that which is inside unless it comes out, for if you incise that which is inside it will contract and go into the flesh and cause pus and corruption in the place and a bad ulcer.
So that it be treated smoothly and be taken out little by little, unless it comes out from behind the leg and does not remain stuck to anything in the body.
And of this vein I have seen in certain men who are of the length of five palms and of these I have already seen one that is of twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its medicine, then you shall insert a long tool into the leg's hole and pierce that with a long instrument through the body, so that all the matter be evacuated, and administer corruption of the place for some days by medicines; and afterwards cure that by the cure of ulcers.
And this vein sometimes has ramification, and more often when it appears in the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and comes out through certain orifices, and from each orifice comes a ramification.
And therefore cure that in this way as we have said above in the division and at the water that is above it.
Of the section over worms that are generated under the skin and is called bovine disease.
This disease is called in certain countries bovine disease because the worms are found only in cattle and are born between the skin and flesh, go throughout the body and break the skin and come out.
And the generation of these comes from the corruption of certain humours, as when worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarians come into the belly.
And it is feared because when it enters the body and rises to the head, and comes out into the air, then a strong fever will fall on it and destroy the brain, and in that place certain worms are seen.
And therefore when you want to cure that and remove it, then do not go there unless you are aware of its movement and appearance, and afterwards tie what is above it tightly and with a strong grip, and then dry it out on it and take it away.
And if it is hidden in the flesh and does not appear to you, then you shall make a cauterization on the place where it is, as we have said above. And the most common cause is the corruption of the wind that corrupts the place in this way.
And if you find that it has come out to the head close to the belly, then tie it tightly above it with a strong grip and then dry it out on it; and when the patient uses digestive medicines to expel rotten bad humours, and keeps away from foods that generate corruption.
Of the section over the disease of nafir.
This disease is called in our country nafir, and it is a painful disease that appears in several limbs, and sometimes changes from one limb to another.
And you have already seen this as I recommended to you. A woman with the disease was brought to a town, and I discovered her arm and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and after an hour it had become much bigger, as if it were living silver running from place to place.
Then he sat down in that place of pain and put it in the muscle, and after an hour it became smaller.
And then it healed in the other side, reaching the other arm.
And then I told him to turn himself around from side to side as you have seen me; and he was very amazed by the change of place and the speed from one limb to another. And you have already seen ahead of me in this way, but you have not seen the many changes that I make when the disease changes from one limb to another. However, in that woman.
And you did not think that it was me, but by the water because the woman was of an age when the body is dry and the veins are exposed, and in this way the disease appears to the sense.
And it is necessary that you do not appear according to this reverse cure in those who are delightful and have soft veins.
And when you want to cure it and the patient feels pain, then do not appear to him at the water as we have said above; then tie it tightly and dry it out on it, and then stop the wind by cauterizing the place.
However, if you do not see it in the exposed veins, then heal it by draining the body and expelling the winds, and use pills of fermented wine and similar ones.
Of the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are different depending on the type of wood they are made from, and depending on their position in the body, since their variety is that some have large points, others small, and concavity, and others flatness, and some have three angles, and those to which it has tongues; and those by which they are star-shaped.
And of the signs of death are when an arrow pierces the skull, and passes through the bone, and is extracted from the nape which is over the brain, for this happens because of the violent heat, and convulsions, and stiffness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and vomiting of colera, and a strong pain is cut off the word, and it is destroyed at the place of the disease. It leaves a white moisture like sweat, and there remains in it the appearance of water from the flesh.
And therefore, if you show these signs to me, then you should abstain from the cure and from extracting the arrow, unless it comes out.
However, the signs of death are when an arrow pierces the heart, so that it is close to the left side, and you feel a pain in it as if it were stuck in hard ground, and there is no feeling of sight; and a strong movement of the arrow seems like a movement of pulse, and the disease of black blood comes out, and a coldness of the extremities, and a strange rattle, and fainting; and then know that death has come.
And when the arrow has struck the lung, then it feels a pain in it as if water were coming out, and the vessels that are close to it put forth pus, and the color of the man is changed, and he breathes deeply and asks for air.
And if he catches the arrow in the veil that is on his foot, and the pain is then near his small ribs, and it is done with great sharp pain and sighing, and does not hurt all the members of the muscles.
And if he catches the arrow in his stomach, then strong vomiting will follow from the digestive disease.
And if he catches the arrow in his belly, and it is stuck there, then there is a tear of the plague, or the hernia, or the bowel that has ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow catches in the bladder, and it comes out with urine, and there is some cause for it to come out quickly, and the pain is very sharp on the thigh, then know that it is deadly.
May the other members also be saved if it is the face, the neck, the throat, and the back, and the assistant, and the spinal bones of the back, and the hernia, and the crotch, and the hips, and similar members, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and is not a poisoned arrow.
And I recommend that you see the nature of these arrows, so that you may be aware of their treatment.
That is the cause, for when a man catches an arrow in his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him without any injury to his eye, and I healed it, and nothing happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a judge who caught it in his eye at the roots of his eyebrows, leaving his eyelids intact, and the arrow was hidden, and there was not even a small piece of it left; it was a sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion's head attached to it.
And that judge was old, and nothing bad happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who fell in his throat; it was an Arabic arrow, and it had two auras; and then I cut it between the two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I carefully removed that one, and it healed the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who fell in his belly; I thought he would die because of the arrow, and then, since it did not change its position for thirty days for any cause of its dispositions, I cut it with a knife and removed it, and it healed him, and nothing bad happened to him.
And I saw another man who caught an arrow in his thigh, and the plague was established on him, and then, after seven years, he caught the arrow in the surface of his crotch.
And I saw a woman who caught an arrow in her belly, and the plague was established inside her, and did not change its dispositions in regard to the natural order of things, and the woman did not suffer any harm in some of her natural qualities.
And I saw another man who caught an arrow in his face, and the plague was established on him, and it split the arrow, causing him no pain, but he looked similar to those people.
And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king that fell in his right nostril, and it had already fallen to the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called to heal him from the moment when the arrow hit him.
And then I turned the arrow slightly to the right; and then I felt that it was a sharp point; but the man could not feel the touch of the point, but he felt a pain in his ear on the right side, and then I understood that it was because of the arrow's head.
And I applied an ointment to the place with a plaster that is active and digestive, assuring myself that the place will be kept so that it appears to me the place of the arrow, so that it heals on top of it.
And nothing bad happened in that place, which was the place where the arrow had been caught; and I continued to apply the plaster to it for many days, and the plague was established during that time, and it split his nose from one side to another in the space of five days, until one day he felt the arrow hit his nose again, and then I understood where the arrow was.
And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the plague for several days, until it was well healed, and then, at my request, he felt that medicine, and I discovered the tip of the arrow, which was attached to the bone.
And then I applied an acute medicine to the plague, which appeared to me clearly the tip of the arrow, and then it disappeared from my sight for four months.
And then the plague became more severe, and I entered it with my instruments, and removed it, and I did not cut off a little of it, but I carefully removed it with forceps that made small cuts, according as the shape of those came at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and then I healed the plague.
And some doctors said that the cartilage of the nose had not been restored, and I restored it, and the plague was established, and it healed completely, and did not leave any mark on it for any cause.
And I recommend to you the nature of extracting some arrows from the nose, so that you pause here with me, and understand it, because the nature of this art and the definitions of those things are not understood by me, for I have not studied them in writing.
And the skilled workers know by little, and here what is known is more than what is not known, and they have new operations and new instruments to remove foreign causes of the disease when it occurs.
And therefore I say that arrows are not caused by foreign objects in the members where they are stuck, but only by two ways: either because of the attraction of the place where they are fixed; or because of the opposite of their departure.
And that which is caused by the attraction of the place where it is fixed is called an internal cause; and that which proceeds from a different location is called an external cause, and that which is shot out and then becomes foreign is called an projected cause.
And if you do not respond to it immediately, then know that the arrow will remain in place for several days before you can examine the flesh that is around it, and that the attraction of it will be removed, and its exit from the body will be stopped.
And seemingly, if it is stuck in the bone and you do not respond to it immediately, then leave it for several days, and repeat applying attraction and moisture to it every day; and then it will be shot out.
And if you do not respond to it immediately for several days, then know that you must pierce the path of the arrow in that bone completely with a very sharp instrument, so that the place is enlarged where the arrow is, and then extract it.
If the arrow has already entered the body and is embedded in the flesh, then you will examine that area and if you feel it, then shoot it with a sharp instrument suitable for the draw of the arrow.
And if you cannot get to it due to the constriction of the wound and its length, and there is no fat, nerve, or vein here, then you will come from above, into the wound, so that it expands and the arrow can be extracted.
And if it has been inserted into the auricle which is held in place, then you will free the flesh where it is stuck from all sides as much as you can; and devise a way to extract it, if you cannot do so due to the flesh's attachment in the fracture of the auricle and its torsion within.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from any location, then use your hand with forceps at all times until it causes that person pain; and do this very carefully so that the arrow does not break and becomes difficult to extract.
And if you cannot get to that person due to the time, then leave it for a few days until the parts heal up again from their movement in the path of the arrow; and then repeat what you did when it was relieved. If it causes the patient discomfort during the treatment, then you will administer the water that I have mentioned for cure in this chapter.
And keep your skill of incision of veins or nerves, or strings, and administer it to all possible ways of the arrow's extraction; and do so with ease, quietness, slowness, and firm determination, as well as you can and I will describe.
And therefore you will extract the arrow in such a way that the patient is comfortable; for it is more convenient to place it according to the figure that I have described, as it is easier to heal. If this water is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
If the arrows that are shot out of the body are opposite to another part, or if you already feel any pain in the parts above the armpit, and if the tip of the arrow is protruding from under the skin near the base, then cut it off; and do so according to how much your forceps reach; and then throw it away, for it is done lightly without causing too much pain.
If it is stuck in the bone, then you will twist your hand according to the pain within which the arrow pushes into the bone, and increase the twisting; and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat what you did until it burns.
If the tip of the arrow is in that person's head, then you will push it with your hand.
If the tip is stuck and you want to administer impact, then place your hand on its head, if it is deaf, and strike with a sharp instrument so that it enters between the hollow of the skull and the arrow's base; and then push it with your hand.
If the arrow is hollow, then you will push it with a strong instrument entering into that person, for the arrow is relieved by that person.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then cover all the flesh with water where it is stuck, if you can; and then care for that person with water.
If the arrow enters into the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the rib, and it is close to your hand, and you can cut it off with a sharp instrument, then do so; and then, if it causes pain, care for that area until it is healed.
Form of forceps which the arrows are thrown:
Keep both hands on the ends of the pliers which are used to throw the arrows with a serrated edge, so that they do not let go of the arrow.
And of those special types are made: large, small, few, and many, according to the size of the arrow and its power, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the flesh.
so that the instrument is pushed into the flesh, and it pushes with that one.
Of bloodletting from veins.
The veins from which bloodletting is done from those which commonly bleed: 1, 2, 3. of those which are in the head. The following veins are in the head: those which pulse at the ears, they are called auricular; those which come from the temples, they are called temporal; those which come from the two holes of the nose, they are called nasal; and those which come from the lips on the left side, they are called labial-left; and those which come from the lips on the right side, they are called labial-right. If there is a pulse in the arms, it is five; and if there is a pulse in the legs, it is six. This head vein is one that is wild, and it is called the wild vein; and the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a major vein, and it consists of one branch from the temple, and another from the head; and this branch is called "citillar"; and this other one is called by the common people "the navel vein"; and that which comes from the arm, and it is paused on the breast, and this is the vein that is stopped in the rib; and this one is in front of the armpit, and it has two branches.
In the chest and on the back there are three veins: one of those is located under the rib cage to the left side of the body; a second one is called a small vein, and its location is next to the rib cage on the right side of the body; and a third one is called the sciatic vein, and its location is next to the back of the rib cage on the left side of the body; and in the back there are other veins similar to those.
The healing of veins which are cut near the ears is made with small, emigrant, and sanguineous bloodletting from the head's bad old wounds.
And the quality of healing such wounds is according to whether you have looked at them again: if it is a hair from the head, and that hair has been cut on the back of the head in the location of both veins next to the ears with a sharp scissors, then you will tie that head with a bandage tightly, so that there is no movement; and you will massage the head with good oil; and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, then you will try again.
Then you will take the knife, and it is sharp, then try again; and if you do not feel the pulse of that vein with your finger, then cut off that one from within the joint until it comes out; and place your hand over the site so that the blood does not come out. And then you will raise your hand to the vein and the joint above, and cut off that vein with a sharp knife; and make an incision in the vein with a sharp scalpel. And the length of the incision is the quantity of two dizajustats or around water; and make it from the sankat as many as you want.
Then tie him with the pulleys and leave that in place which is to be healed.
And already at the beginning of this book, we have described the incision of those and their cauterization.
More than two blood vessels that are used in the cauterization of the veins is to emigrant ancient and persistent evil and frequent headaches and sharp fluid flowing into the skin.
And the quality of bloodletting is according to that which I recommend to you: Tie up the patient's legs with a rope so that their two veins appear on the surface by visible movement and are demonstrated by the pulse at their feet, and then try it yourself.
Then you shall raise the rope so that the vein is opened from above with your finger, and insert the bloodletting needle into it, and raise the vein up; and cut those too with what you have done in the two veins; and let run the blood according to the quantity of your need.
Then take off the patient' bandage, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place the pulleys and strings on it and tighten them strongly, and leave that in place which is to be healed.
And already at the beginning of this book, we have recalled their healing, and their incision, and their cauterization.
And therefore the healing of bloodletting from the forehead vein is to the bloodletting of the cerebral veins for ancient headaches and emigrant, rigor and putrid ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting is according to that which I recommend to you; unless the patient ties himself with a rope, with a bandage that appears on the vein; and then take the instrument which is called a scissor, whose form it is:
Then place the point of the scissor eminently on the vein and strike it with a pencil or another cause in the manner of it, and leave the blood to run according to the quantity which you want; then take off the patient' perforation bandage and leave that in place which is to be healed.
And some blood has been opened with a needle, but it is not known that the bloodletting is of acute extremities as well as the others bloodletting; unless it is on one side, because the bone is strong and hard it would break in it the bloodletting if subtile.
More than two veins that are on the eyelids of two eyes because of the skin's roughness due to rigor and seborrhea in the eyelids, and for ancient headaches in the face.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient ties himself with a rope, and then bloodletting those, and you are standing on its head.
And the bloodletting is done according to the transverse at length a little with a needle, because in that place there is not meat; and if the bloodletting is subtle, strong the extremity of it is broken.
Then let run the blood as many as your need, and place those on the pulleys, and tighten them strongly, and then take off those.
More than the bloodletting of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and intense pain, and for ancient headaches and emigrant that occur in the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient ties himself with a rope and then holds his left nose with your right hand, and take the subtle needle long and hold it in its place on the nose according to the direction, because the vein does not appear by feeling here, and because the blood begins to run as soon as possible.
And after you have finished your needle with a little bloodletting and let the blood run as your need; then place it on a string because that is restored slightly.
More than the healing of bloodletting is to the constriction of blood, and to the beginning of leprosy and the movement of ancient headaches and violent diseases and bad corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient ties himself with a rope, each one in its own bandage; and place the artisan on the head of the patient, and the patient be seated on a stool.
Then take the vein long with a wide needle little at a time; then let run the blood according to the season or quantity as many times as your need, and then do the same for the other vein.
Then take off the bandage and tighten the two veins with a moderate constriction because the patient is not choking, and leave that within to rest because the plague is healed.
And the healing of bloodletting is for ancient diseases, namely to small sores and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and to bad ulcers that are on the nose and on its circle.
And the quality of bloodletting is that you cut the patient' nose before you, and tie his neck with a bandage, and then turn the patient' lips to one side and look at two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and demonstrate each by its darkness, and more because in the circle of those are small black veins; and then cut each according to an incised incision.
Then if you are in doubt, leave it to me; and I will know which is which, and the most manifest form of those.
And then make the incision of the two veins that are on the patient' lips.
More than two veins that are on the tongue, the healing of bloodletting is to the bloodletting of the cerebral vein for pre-focaciosa diseases and to ancient headaches in the throat, and to ancient diseases in the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting is that you follow the patient' tongue between your lips, and raise the patient' tongue, and then look at it from both sides, and the color of each one is turning to darkness.
Then bloodletting each one; and remember that you do not bloodlet those, because those are arteries.
And your veins that are bloodletting in the heart are those from which runs customarily in all men, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two ways, or put on a needle with subtlety declining; or cut with a knife, and if it does not run, then this is the way:
And the cut is made times, and it leads to opening the concave veins full of blood, and at those that contain large blood.
And this bloodletting is of lesser latency and very subtle extremity, and it leads to the bloodletting of veins that contain subtle citron blood.
May's the life of the flebotomy of the basilica vein which is one of three veins; for it extracts the blood from the pains that are in the groin and the gut, and so it stops the feet and the belly.
And it is convenient for the floubotomator, when that flebotomy happens, that he keeps very carefully and pays much attention to that, because there is an artery there which makes blood flow, and if he makes a mistake or cuts in the puncturing of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause blood to flow, so it is convenient that he does not do that with a piercing needle, before making the cut.
And if you do not see the basilica by an obvious sign, then you should know that it is there and you should move to the other, or look for some vein; or that you do flebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is obvious; and cut off that with flebotomy.
May's if you want to do the flebotomy on him, then you should know that the place that you touch in front of the bicep is where you can see the vein clearly; and you should hold the arm down; and cut off the vein with a sharp cut at the hollow end of the arm, as I have said before; and be careful not to make a mistake in the cut.
And when you see, with a strong grip, the joint that you have held down at the hollow part; then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and so it comes out.
And if you see the blood running in the flebotomy as a stream of a child, and that blood is thin; then you should know that it is the blood of the artery; and you should stop the vein with a long cut, and then tie off the vein, and if the blood has stopped; then you should hold the arm.
And keep the patient from moving, and take care of him, and do not hurt him for a few days until he is healed.
May' be if the blood has not stopped and it is necessary that you go to the water, then you should cut off the artery with a scissor, and hold it up; and put one of your hands on the end of the vein at the end of the joint; and tighten it down with your thumb; and take two needles and hold them against the skin within a day.
Then if the blood has stopped, then it is; and if not, then take care of him with water from which the blood drops, remembering the place where the powder was dropped to stop the blood flow.
And it is difficult to stop the blood from flowing in a small place because of the location of the joint and the possibility of hurting the arm.
May' be from the basilica vein the flebotomy is good to extract the blood from the brain and from the head; because it is made up of branches of these two veins, as I have said before.
And if the floubotomator is afraid of the floubotomy because there is a nerve; and if he makes a mistake in the cut of the floubotomy and damages that nerve; it will cause him to be stunned, and his recovery will be difficult; and all the same, if that nerve is hidden and subtle, and not shown at first sight, then you should know that when you stop the flebotomy on the arm with a cut from above, and avoid the nerve with your elbow.
And if the vein is between two nerves; then you should cut it in length.
May' be the life of the flebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws the blood from the head, and keeps the pains in the neck.
And in this specifically, if you want to make the flebotomy with a needle or with a knife; because it is the most safe of all veins, because it does not leave the artery nor the nerves behind.
But very strong blood comes out in some people when they do not make the cut in the first place; and it is not noticeable that this has happened.
The first one is that you should know that the floubotomy is not administered if there is no hope of recovery; and that it is done with caution to avoid accidents; and that it is done in one of the veins that are at the back, which are: cephalic, facial and basilica; and that it is made in the beginning of the year, in spring and autumn, and in winter close to the start of the year.
And it should be done on the third day or at the first moment that has passed three hours since the morning.
May' be when a floubotomy is administered; it is convenient and necessary to do it at the right time, in the morning or afternoon, at any hour of the day.
And if it does not happen that the person is over sixty years old; and women are not to be fleubotomed before they have passed their seventy years.
And if anyone wants to be fleubotomed in a certain way; then you should know that they can put water on the body before the floubotomy with a cup; so that the veins do not carry excess fluid during the flebo-tomie of the body, which is useless, and does not benefit the main parts.
And do not flebotomize the patient who has nausea and vomiting; nor those who are drunk or have a hangover; nor do you flebotomize them when they feel ill; or when they are tired; or when they have done much work, or stayed up late; or for any other reason that destroys the body's vitality; or the animal’s.
And you should know that those who have thick blood, and eat much food, and drink much liquid, and take medicines; then you do not flebotomize them in front of those people because it is necessary to understand their humors.
And you should go into the bath if there is no reason for you not to do it, or because of the exercise that makes the blood run, so that the blood becomes subtle.
And you should stop the flebotomy on him at the foot of the day; so it is near three hours in the afternoon, as I have said before.
And you should know that the day of that person is not free from all animal accidents; nor is it free from sorrow, anger and fear; nor from all bodily accidents; nor from unnecessary work, or worry, or trouble.
And on the same day, you should know that people take advantage of these things for their own use because they have a certain quantity of what is possible; and they also do so with the help of aromatics and perfumes, and balms and similar things to those people.
And follow the floubotomator with a pointed cautery that is more difficult for him; or with a small cut on the body of that person who has to be fleubotomized.
And then take his arm, and rub it with the hand of the floubotomator two or three times; and then tighten the joint with a rope and wrap it two times.
E sia the stricture is early, for the stricture when it does not open, or the stricture is too much, then prohibit the flow of the wound; or is soft, and then prohibit the binding of the wound.
And approach the stricture, because whoever should be fluid must wash their hands together inside so that the veins are not swollen and declared to the feeling.
And approach the flubotomatix with a little oil of the sea itself completely; and pause his hand on the side of that vein, leaving the place from which the flubotomy will take place, so that the vein runs a little bit, and the percussion is stopped because the veins are the ones that cause more pain when they are pressed; and it is found out that the flubotomatix does not hurt the vein, and if he hurts it, that vein is contracted; then the flubotomatix stops; and the flubotomy is not open, and if it opens, that vein is stopped.
And therefore, because of this, whenever the flubotomatix stops and is irritated in all these causes.
And then pause the flubotomy, maybe if the vein is found in a place, then no; and if not, then repeat water another place from that place a little bit, or over the joint, if the place is not painful.
And if the place is painful or the patient's legs are swollen, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because it will cause a lot of pain; nor do you put them in the bath.
And then repeat the flubotomy if the time has passed.
And if the apericio is small and the pain is subtle and you are afraid that the amount that you want will not be felt, then repeat the flubotomy in that same spot second time with care; adjust a little bit in the apericio, and make sure to avoid hurting anyone before the place becomes painful, because that place is painful in most men's cases.
But if that has already become painful, then do not repeat on it, because it will not excuse you from any cause; and pause over that some part of the oil, because it eases the pain of the body. And this place is better than that one.
And it seems to me that the oil is administered in all flubotomies according to which veins are prohibited from being bound by the sanction of the pain; and they make water of tarragon and sage when stopped from one of those places, because the pain has subsided and the wound has opened when it becomes thick.
And if in the place of the flubotomy is created a large pustule, because it happens sometimes that blood comes out of some veins; and more often when it is not a wound but that vein itself, or in the apericio of a small vein, then you bandage it up, and pause over the place sponge bathed in water and salt, a little bit burned, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
And when the pain of the wound has passed from that vein completely with water;
And if it remains in that place for some days any black or green color, then do not drink water; and if you want to, pause over that place of aloe and rose dissolved, or any other cause of mint juice or calaminol or similar.
And it happens sometimes that pustules and lumps are caused by flubotomy from the base.
And therefore pause your hand on that place, and if you feel softness then your compression is too strong over that place, then that eminence is bad and evil; and then keep in mind that you do not pause on any cause of water which we have said, because a lot of blood will flow from the sanc' s artery.
And make plaster with water in which it is tightened, so that the place becomes hardened, and then heal that place with another treatment before it is healed.
And when you extract from the wound all the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that prevails over it, as it appears;
Because if the wound is black then leave it to rise and heal; and if you make it thicker then leave it to heal, and if it is watery then leave it until its sharpness has passed.
And when the place is full and hard and needs to extract the wound in a spot, then the flubotomy of that vein must be enlarged, and the flubotomy must be long.
And when it is swollen, then do the opposite of what has been said; and if you extract it in several places, then keep that spot straight.
And the best thing to be administered in a flubotomy of a vein is that it is transverse section, not a puncture.
And this way of flubotomy saves the wound from flowing and from cutting the nerves, and it is more commendable and more saved than flubotomy according to its length and width.
And to that which is accustomed to happen fainting because of flubotomy, then before the flubotomy make a small amount of water infused with milk or simple oxymel burned; and extract from it three places or four.
And if it is a cold of the whole body, then make a mixture before flubotomy poured in oil of mirra or in oil of honey flavored with spices such as nutmeg, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in an aromatic oil and a pungent one; or in an oil that is aromatized and smells.
And if fainting because of flubotomy happens, and it is a cause that comes out from some wound, then make a mixture before the flubotomy poured in meat water and oil with subtle odor; and use aromatic things to make the patient' s hands clean.
And use of the other causes which we have said in the division in the chapter of fainting because of evacuation.
And who wants to test the strength of his arms and dissolve his pain according to the second place, then do flubotomy because it is an evasive movement, and its virtue is freewill; let him evacuate the wound little by little, so that its quantity depends on the virtue in the continuous days.
But who wants to test the strength of his arms and escape pain according to the third place, then make water near nine hours or eight from the first flubotomy.
But who wants to throw the pain of his body into the opposite of the place from which it declines, then do so on the second or third day.
And that body in which there is already a pain and it is sharp and causes fever, then do so on the same place and make a big aperture before it happens fainting, more because you may have preserved all the conditions of flubotomy; and pause your hand on his pulse of the arm where the wound is located, so that it does not end in death in place of fainting, because the doctor is ignorant and careless.
And it does not happen when you want to release the arm and evacuate the pain according to the second place, because it has already closed the orifice of the vein and it is difficult to extract the pain; then press down on that with violence and open it widely, because water is too bad.
And while you leave it before the second flubotomy is complete; or keep it in water according to the sharpness of the flubotomy which coagulates the wound in the orifice of the vein; or pause over that with a small compression within that the pain leaves;
And if the vein is ruptured, then let it be left alone and don't touch it until the bruise has settled.
And if necessity forces you to evacuate the second time, and there is no excuse, then let him urinate on that place or in another limb on another vein.
And the vein called "brass strap" is cut in place of the fistula or bazillion, when they are not twisted or hidden, for it is made up of those.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient's hand enters in water until the vein appears clearly.
Then let it be strengthened with a tight bandage around the limb half way; and let blood be taken secondarily from the small transverse vein, not laterally or lengthwise.
And then is the wide opening and is your bloodletting at which you take blood from the arm at the joint of the hand a little bit.
And if the flow of blood is stopped, then let him dip his hand in water until you can get to your need.
If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from dipping your hand in water; but the season is paused in the wintertime.
And the bloodletting from this vein is more valuable than from all the other veins, for there are no pulsating veins or nerves.
And the bloodletting from the wrist of the right hand is sent to the feverish parts of the body.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that you strengthen your hand with a bandage or with your own, for it was dipped in water, until the vein swells and is clearly seen; and then let blood be taken transversely; and if you cut that one from top to bottom, no one would see it.
And remember not to wrap your hand up after the bloodletting; for there are nerves in the naked skin of the body.
Then dip your hand in water again and let the blood run into that, for if you do not dip it, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, and stop the flow.
And if the blood is drawn according to the quantity of necessity, then you pause over the vein with salt and oil, that it may not be consolidated too much; and seemingly cover all veins straight.
If the bloodletting from the wrist of the left hand is more valuable than that from the right hand, it is because it is sent to the feverish parts of the body.
Do likewise with the bloodletting from his right hand.
And the quality of the bloodletting from the vein is to feverish parts that are distant from the body, as those of the mother, and to retentions of menstruation, and to feverishness of the cheeks and ulcers of the legs and old breasts, and to their resemblance to fever.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient dip his hand in water until it appears clearly on the wrist; and let him put a bandage over the joint of the hand; and the place of the vein he cut off apparently from the said place, and from that it branches out towards the face of the hand.
And then let blood be taken in a wide branch or cut off from the back of the neck, for it is better and more beneficial to the body.
And if you take blood from the face of the hand, then let him beware of the nerves that are behind it on the face of the hand; and let the blood be taken transversely, as if you wanted to cut it.
And let this be your bloodletting season.
If the flow of blood is stopped, then let him dip his hand in water until you can evacuate it.
And if the bloodletting person makes a mistake in the first place, then let him repeat it a little bit, for the place is salty; and do not fear from it, but beware of the nerves, as we have said before.
Do likewise with the other arm, inwards.
And of the sciatic vein, the place is apparently cut off from the back of the leg.
The bloodletting from this vein is more valuable than that of other veins when it is done for fever.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient enter in bath, and goes quickly and strongly along his back from the shoulder blades until it reaches the bottom of the spine within four fingers' space in a long, thin band, for it does not appear otherwise than by water.
And then when it appears, then let him take blood from that side first, which is easier to reach; or cut it off from top to bottom, for the place is salty.
It is better to take blood from the side of a man when he is relaxed; and if it appears on one side, do not be concerned with the feeling of the whole body; then let him take blood from any part of his arm, and that which appears on the face of the hand near the thumb is better.
And beware of the nerves, and let the blood run out of the quantity you want.
Then return the vein to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the blood from flowing too much; for it is better to stop it carefully.
Of windiness and of the qualities of using those.
Windiness so from corns, or from earache, or from cold.
Windiness is caused by two things: the first one is bloodletting and extraction of blood; and the other is windiness from scratching.
And this windiness that is caused by scratching is due to two things: either it is fire and fire; or it is heat and heat.
And the places that are used for windiness by bloodletting and extraction of blood are twelve parts of the body, of which one is at the nape of the neck, and is the last division of the head; and the second part from the jaw; and windiness from the chin, leaving the mouth; and windiness from two spatulas; and windiness from hollows, and it is at the end of the collar; and windiness from two bracers; and windiness from two cheeks.
And windiness does not extract blood except from small veins in the flesh, and it does not stop virtue by those veins; or it stops by fire or hot food; nor does it stop unless all the body is evacuated.
If necessity forces windiness because of fever or continuous pain, then let it be given in one hour at the beginning of the meal and at the end, and in the middle place; and in the middle part, whenever it is necessary.
And then if it happens in some cause like this, and especially if it is at the third or sixth hour of the day, then command that windiness be made.
And with the wind of the neck is that when it gives gravity to the head and falls into the hollows; but also because it should be appropriate evacuation from all the body.
This ventouse is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not good that you use oil on those who are in a state of fever or have a catarrh, because this causes great harm.
And it is not good that you use oil on those who are old and in the heads of which there are injuries.
But to that who is continuous over it is made oblivion; and because you command the ventouse that your hand stops a little to the ventouse at the edges of the legs, fearing the generation of oblivion.
But the ventouse of alcohol is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and because it gives to asthma, and to the constriction of air and to the splitting of the instrument of air, and to cough, and to swelling.
And if the ventose of alcohol is put a little, because if it is stopped by legs, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventose of almond gives to the accidental pains in the head and to blindness, emigration, pre-focus and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And if you command the ventouse that he does not press your hand to the scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and causes a rush of blood.
And the ventose of legs gives alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resemblance to the lefts of the diseases that are in the mouth, and they stand in place of phlebotomy of another which is in the two lips.
But the ventose that is made on the two spatulas gives to caphutan, which is made by swelling of quality.
And the ventose of the two legs of the mouth gives youth to the phlebotomy of three veins, if it is from the basilica, the dark and the cephalic, because that one attracts all those veins that are closed by the hand, and those veins that are smaller than those other veins that are closed inside so that it reaches the attraction to these three veins.
And you command the ventouse that he does not make a scarification, because the place is naked of flesh and leaves him his nerves and arteries.
And this is a ventouse that is ventosed on the ass and gives to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers that are small.
And if you command the ventouse that it is a great ventose, and that it is of ermine, because the place does not give permission to strong separation; and a strong separation of fine ventoses makes scarification for scarification.
But the fine ventoses of the legs give by a clear manifestation, because they attract the blood from all the body, and give to the ancient pains of the neck and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and give to bothor and ademil; and they stand in place of phlebotomy of two fingers, and of alhorcoben, and of two cavils.
In the meantime it destroys all the body and causes fainting in young men.
And of the ventoses of alhorcoben is appropriate youth to the youth with two ventoses of the legs.
And the quality of the position of the ventoses is that you stop the ventose at the beginning to see and flow by early, and do not prolong the position of the ventoses, but pause them carefully, and keep them in a hidden way, and let the humors come to the place by coming. And it does not cease to repeat this several times, and continue inside until he sees the place become red and swollen and the appearance of the blood.
And you scarify then repeat slowly the flow little by little, and approach carefully to the position of the bodies.
Because that man who is of tender flesh of the hands, you scarify once and not again, because the place is not ulcerated.
And you command the ventouse that he amplify the scarification and make it broad a little, and flow easily.
And if the blood is thick, then you scarify twice, because in the first scarification it opens the way of subtleization to the blood and of its liquidity. But in the second to the acquisited scrutiny of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is feeble, then let there be made a third scarification so that it achieves the last.
Finally, when we want to extract a little blood or a little, it is enough for us one scarification.
And if we want to extract from a blood, then you scarify with a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then you scarify by a dense scarification.
And the term of scarification in which the depth of the line is only enough.
And if that man's line is thick, hard, dark and his hands are slender, you use oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of lilac or oil of chamomile, or of thyme, and to those who look like it. And if it is winter, then use oil of rose, or oil of almond, or oil of lemon, or oil of sesame; and if it is summer, the windouse should be applied quickly, gently and resolutely;
And if the superfluity is thick and heavy, then use oil of amaranth, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of aniseed, and to those who look like it.
But if the ventouse is of large size, then it should be prohibited from oil, and if these places of ventoses of their own are applied quickly with a warm water or with cold water of seltzer, or with water of chamomile, and to those who resemble them.
And if that man's blood is of a moist nature, then wash his ventoses with wine or water of mirth or pomegranate and to those who resemble them.
And if the superfluities are thick, then wash his ventoses with wine of ancient, or water of sansuc (which is marjoram), or aniseed tea, or chamomile tea, and to those who resemble them.
And if the ventose is kept in front of a bath; having it administered early before the bath for an hour or two, and if he sleeps near the ventose.
What is needed so that it is regulated to be applied before wound treatment.
And consider at the beginning: then if the ventouse or that who is to be phlebotomized is coleric and apply on the head pain and inflammation, then you take causes of cold drinks, such as wine of mirth and lemon, and mint tea, and black currant tea, and julep, and to those who resemble them.
And pause their food such as potatoes, and meat of spring lamb, and prepared foods with sweetness, and to them who resemble them.
And if that man's complex is strong, then take in drinking honey syrup, or almond syrup of astringent taste, and pomegranate, and a little smell of mint among the food; and it is recommended to him that he use scarcity of drink and eating, and pause his meals such as potatoes, and canaries, and pisons, and petitzals.
And where, on the day of venerection and phlebotomy, the drink is greater than the food.
And where, at certain times of the day, to certain men, is given the wine of tarry alkanol, or a medicine of musk, or muscadine, or acacia, before venerection or phlebotomy or close by, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and do not take those scalps.
May the venerections that are to be sacrificed be those that are paused on the member itself and on the podagra and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the incision of the anus, because these members do not suffer sacrifice over themselves.
And do not wish it by those but a attraction of the member's blood, so if you pause venerection on the breast in the malady of the flow of blood from the member's wound; and use that because it dissolves a frizzy unsightly member, so if you pause on the navel and the womb, for that attracts the member and scars it and hurts it because it resolves venerection.
And it is paused on the cheeks when it happens to their opium or pox, for by virtue of a strong attraction, the opium is greatly alleviated and the pox is eradicated from its place.
And apparently it happens when it is paused on the member and the navel, a venerection in those confined.
And these venerections are administered with water only; and some venerections are administered with fire.
And some venerections are administered full of hot water in the navel' malady.
And water is so that the venerection is filled and is larger, either is hot water alone or water in which herbs have been boiled to suit.
Form of venerection administered with fire: is the breadth of the orifice of two fingers, according to which we have formed it; and the quantity of the liquid be most of a palm; and be in the height of it, in the place that is in the circuit, most of it, the trail be small according to the quantity that enters into it an needle.
It is made from a small amount of sweet oil or lemon, large margins, lion, owl and third for that it does not lead the member out of its position on it.
And be at mid-leg from a transverse pole of iron or wood, where it is paused lit to the fire.
And this venerection is much greater than that which we have just mentioned; and the little less of that according to the malady and the state of the one who uses it.
And the venerections of the old and exhausted are other than the venerections of the young and strong bodies.
And the quality of pausing this venerection with fire on the member is that it extend the hand to the hand of the pole with a decently lit candle, and pause it on the middle of the opposite side of the member of the venerection, so that the fire be lit around the place where the candle leaves for it not to be extinguished the body of the patient.
And then be paused on the member of the patient, and the hand be placed on the place that we have said, until when we have the venerections and do not feel the hand holding them, and the vapor is heated above this hand, then the venerection is dried.
And light the fire according to its way, and repeat that if you do not like it.
May the venerection that is administered in the malady of the woman, with water, and which does not have a transverse pole or a hand, and is not administered except to be filled with water, and it is paused on the member only.
And this is its form: And this venerection, how much it is greater, so much is better, so that it receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter .xciii.
Sanguineous venerections are not administered in the members but in the members where it is impossible to place venerections, because of their poverty, or apparently so; or in a naked member of meat, apparently so.
And the quality of using those that if they have been found to be sanguiniferous, which are in the clean waters of the world.
And then are let go on the day and at night in water that is clean before they become hungry, and do not cause any trouble in the belly of those; and then be evacuated the body in the beginning with phlebotomy and venerection; and then are rubbed the member of the patient before it becomes red; and then be paused on it.
And then are filled, and here ends.
And if it is possible to take the place with venerection, so much more will be gained in a long time.
Or, then wash the place with water and knead it up; and pour out water on it; and rub it, and squeeze it.
And if it is prolonged the member of the wound, so that the blood is not separated, then dip a cloth in water and pause it on the wound; and let it sit until it is dried up.
And if the wound is repeated, then sprinkle on it vitriol that has been triturated, or grind and make similar to those causes of the stinging ones, so that the wound is dried up; or be let go on the place the last of the cooked beans, and be let go until the beans adhere to the place, and the wound is dried up.
And where, if necessary, the repetition of venerections, when it is possible to change those.
And if venerections are forbidden by suspension, then rub the place with fresh blood or a needle is placed in the places where it hurts; and then be paused on it because those when they feel any pain, so soon after that.
And when you want to make them fall, sprinkle on those a little amount of aloe that has been triturated, or salt or ash, and soon after.
Thus begins the process of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is a restoration of fracture and an accidental dislocation of bones.
Or, son you aware that this chapter is not pleasant to read, nor do those common physicians understand it, and no one will ever read it again.
And for this reason it is done that this way of the sciences in our land is secret; and I have not forgotten it because of all the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, so that I extracted the science from them.
And then I will begin to teach experiments and studies in the length of my life.
And I have already written this in this chapter all that my science contains and upon which is passed my greatest experiment; because it has opened to you a new field and freed me from the occupation of elaborating; and I have renewed it at the end of the declaration; and I have formed it from two previous chapters.
Chapter first.
A summary of the cause of bone fractures, and from that which is necessary, before we begin to reminisce about broken limbs and diverse stories of each one. And where, then, I will tell at the beginning of this chapter the highest points of speech; and which are certainly understood by those who master this noble art; and not by others who simply speak or learn it.
And therefore I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or twist or fall, you should cover yourself with bloodletting or drawing it out or any time without prohibition, and the remedy of virtue will come, or whether it happens to you or you are old, or there is hot weather or a cold one.
And let it be ready in a bowl of herbs and meat of birds and crabs; and prohibit thick meats and filling with food and all food that fills the veins of blood, until you are certain of an embolism, and if you do not fear an outflow of substance to the limb.
Then return the patient to his usual position first with the one that he usually sleeps on.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, you should feed him with nutritious food that is thick and heavy and has viscosity, so that with food made from wheat cooked in water, and rice, and garlic, and feet, and bellies of cows, and hen, and fresh milk, and large and similar foods, and this diet causes coagulation of the fracture slightly and better.
And know that when the bones are broken in men who are in their early years and in old age, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of the limbs.
But nature adjusts and heals the broken bone from the beginning of any similar cause to glut that adheres and strengthens it within that it becomes united and bound together, so that it comes to its end of strength and stability, as with fire at the beginning, so that no prohibition causes it to stop from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the patient's food, food in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as I have said.
And know that the types of fractures are different according to the difference of limbs, a fracture of the hip bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the thigh bone; and similar to all the other limbs are different from each other.
And I give you a summary of all kinds of fractures, described in the separate chapter of another book.
A variety of fractures within itself. And the types of fractures of bones within themselves are different; for some it happens in the shape of an arch and others that it happens at the ends of the bone: and those are the fractures of the knee and the feet and the additions, proceeding and not proceeding, as when it is broken by a blow while writing, and a small fracture in the head and disruption.
And to all kinds of fractures is given a certain type of treatment in its restoration, as it comes to be remembered separately in its place.
A symbol of a fracture of the bone. And this is how a broken bone is known: it is a twist and a prominence and an appearance that can be felt with your hand.
And therefore when it is not in the twisted place that appears or does not appear, and it does not cause great pain when you touch the bone with movement, then there is no fracture.
And while it is possible that it is a twist or a small crack, so that you do not feel it when you touch it with your hand and press all over it; and if you pause for a moment from the medicines of which you have a memory of that moment that you bring to its place; and if it becomes tight by a subtle tightening.
And know that the place is when it is curved and does not split into two or another that happens to its knee, as it is raised from all its sides, then begin the hour of correction of it, because if you happen to it an embolism of blood.
And if an embolism of blood happens to it, then leave it for a few days until it stops; and if you can hide it in any way that you can imagine using levitation or invention.
And know that the restoration of it and the tightening up of it is more difficult than that of the bone in which this happens to the knee.
And leave it as best you can remember it coming.
But if in the bone there are two satagies, then leave it as broken into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or at the wrist or at the ankle and at the leg.
And be the position of your hand in which you pause the limb extended as natural, while the breaks of the limb are extended, then know that you must return those additions to their places by invention and according to any way that you can imagine putting them in place.
And protect yourself according to your strength so that it does not happen to you through your operation or injury; and by the power of the one bone, apply to the other its shape according to its best forms.
And if at that hour you take advantage of touching it with your hand, and if there is no other cause, then correct it and hide it according to the amount of your strength.
And with violent extension and compression, as when foolish movements cause the appearance of an embolism of blood to happen through their operation, or cause a contraction in the limb to occur, as we have seen by the sight of it for the operation of their foolish movements.
And the quality of the tightening of the limb is that which I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs are different in their smallness and size and in the form of those.
And of those that are small, as the arm and the hand, and similar to those, then know that the wrapping is of a thin cloth.
But of those that are large, as the thigh and the hip, then know that in these it is necessary for the wrapping to be tight and firm, so that the bandage does not cut into the limb and tightly hold it in its place, so that it does not leave a mark; and if it covers all parts with a strong binding.
And begin, and quickly leave, and carefully stop it on the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the limb that you want; and tighten your hand very much with the binding.
And leave it at the beginning of the most powerful place of the fracture, and tighten your hand with the most powerful binding that you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And leave it slightly longer in the wrapping of the place of the fracture, and soften the tightening little by little, until you take it to its full extent.
And take another object and wrap that other cloth around the place again, and tie the wrapping above where you left off from the fracture; and your operation in the tightness of the wrapping and in softening that one as we said in the first wrapping.
And leave between the strips of leather or fabric where it is wrapped the curvature of the fracture, if there is a curvature; and in no way leave for any reason.
And leave on top of that other object, and wrap those strips nicely, so much so, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the place, and then pause on that which is seated the abscess there and which causes swelling; and let it rest for a few days; and then you tighten it well.
And the strips of canes of any kind, and formed wisely; or of oak-wood; or of palm branches; and be the width of each strip according to this form and figure:
However, consider that the strip that is placed on top of that fracture is thicker and further away from the other strips than those are, and according to the length of the limb in size and thinness; and leave again with a firm grasp according to what we said about tightness; and here is your tightness according to the place of the fracture, and how much it is farther from the fracture, the tighter it should be.
And consider that the threads are thinner in thickness and smaller in size, and are of linen; and if the threads are thick, then also, through the operation of some foolishness while the threads are stopped with string knots there, it is a great mistake when it causes tightness to be equal.
And also very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve tightness with those which you want, and there is no space between the strip and the strip of a finger.
And if the patient is tied by the edges of the strips to the tightness in those places, then pause with leather or a woven fabric there, so that it does not cause injury.
Some fractures are caused by bad habits, and they occur in the tendon, and I come back to the memory of that one in the capitulum according to its uniqueness.
And know that there is no tightness on the first day of a broken limb; which causes because the limb, if it is large, does not cover that it stops on the strips until three days or seven or more, according to your assurance about the arrival of an abscess.
And this is the way of the embalmers with whom the Ancients used to restore them, which were placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of embowelling as a shower of restoration of a fracture, suitable for complicated cases and mostly for women and children, because it is not hot on that which moves the mill; and it is that you take powder of corn meal, and that is the flour's medulla which the movement of the mill causes in the parts of the mill.
And so take that also, but instead of that, sift it with the skin of a lamb, and leave the thickening not thin or small; then use that.
Another way to dress fractures and dislocations and twists: take assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, aniseed, and mirra, which is extracted from a million salvages, all of them three times, and mirra and aloes once; all are finely chopped and mixed with water or white of egg if the constitution of the patient is scarred; and then use this ointment, for it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and gives men health.
Another way to dress fractures and twists: take white oil, one dragon from mirra, and once from aloes; from acacia, a dragon from six; and from the aronian berry, ten dragons.
All of them are sifted in a mortar with a little water or oil, and they are mixed, then sieved; and they are made thick with water or lamb' skin, and given to him.
Methods of embowelling at joints and separating bones from their places, and which cause pain or splits or fractures: take sheep's wool and dip it in wine and oil, and place it on the place.
Not useful for this restoration, for an abscess of bad temper and to expel pain properly.
Another way to make embowelling that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of poppy; grind them all together into an embowel.
Method of fresh embowelling to restore bone fracture when you want to solve the bad temper of an abscess: take raisin of almond, of chamomile flowers and violet leaves, of sesame flour, of all parts. i.234; They are all sifted with water or oil if the limb is not scalfed.
If it is scalfed, then take that also in water or lamb' skin and use that.
Another way of embowelling that is more firm in resolution than the first one, when an abscess of hard temper occurs: take raisin of almond and caraway seeds; and also fennel seed, marjoram, violet leaves, chamomile flowers, all parts and give to him. They are all sifted with water or oil according to the quality of the limb and rest for the color of the limb.
You do not make incisions in the holy book that is placed on the twisted limb, which restores it except for wax that is placed there and oil; and consider that it be well made between thickness and thinness.
You see that they are placed on the twisted limb, which restores it except for small pieces of quality only there as myrrh, endives and herbs similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Methods of embowelling that you give to injury and pain: take myrrh, caraway seeds, hair of a man or hen, and almond, salt; they are sifted, sieved and mixed together into an embowel. They are all sifted, sieved, and given to him.
The quantity according to which it is wrapped around the limb, and then you leave it there; if it does not cause pain or a split, nor has the bone broken; then do not leave it for any reason. And if there is intense pain or a split or swelling at the place, then you should put the embowel on him in the hour; and here ends the method of embowelling.
And take a piece of linen and marine sponge also; and dip that in water or wine, and wash it over the place until the pain is soothed and the swelling stops; then leave the limb at rest for an hour; and then leave on top of the sheep' wool soaked in wine and oil, or rosewater oil, and lie down; within a new moment you are sure about the abscess of bad temper, and that you stop the swelling of the limb, and its pain is soothed.
And then repeat that subtle constriction and paste small and don't tighten them for your first constriction, and gently on the spot that is to be cured.
And if many times the boil and the redness and the pain and the swelling and all the accidents have already been removed with paste and constriction, then you repeat that same thing after having made a starting cut.
And if there does not happen to the member any cause of those that we have said, then don't give up that treatment after three or four days or five or seven; And some are left for twenty days according to what you have said, since the part has been relieved of the constriction, and if there is an adhesion of the fracture, then place blood-clotting powder on it.
Then adjust the constriction more than your first constriction, and adjust the thickening of the liquid in the patient's skin according to how it has been relieved.
More if you find the place of the fracture has dried out and become thinner than before, then know that food is not reaching it; and therefore immerse it in hot water every three days, so that it is moistened slightly; and with this operation, treat the member with food, and it will be cured a little.
More if the joint-friction that is made to restore the fracture of the member is not restored at the beginning, according to what it covers, and is restored according to its tortuosity, then know that it is an error according to the operation, and great fear, and if it were to be dried out, it would enlarge the old ones in their free parts and spread out on the water.
And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is reasonable to think that they don'
Chapter according: Of fractures when they occur on the head.
The types of fractures are various, and the causes are distinct, since some fractures are caused by impact with a hard object, and the impact stops all the way down to the root of the bone, leaving it intact, as if there had been a cut in one part of the bone, but not in another; and that type of fracture is called a complete levitation.
And the pain of these two types of fractures is great or small, and the cause of them is impact with fire or stone on the head, and their appearance is similar.
And this fracture is either penetrating, so that the skin is already separating from the bone, or it is on the face of the bone, and the pain of these two types of fractures is great or small.
And some fracture is that it is absorbed in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair, and this type of fracture is called a capillary fracture.
And it is a fracture that has been caused by impact with stone or impact with fire, and its appearance is similar, so that one layer of the bone enters into another place inside; and it is made in the concave part, as if there had been an entrance into the inside when the impact occurs on the sides.
And most often it is made on the bones of humans, as if they were heads of youth.
And therefore all these types of fractures are bad, and that is why they are called such. I come with the memory of all this in my mind.
And I have learned about all these types of fractures through detection, inquiry, and observation of corrupted flesh that is on them.
And the capillary specialty has been known through a discovery that is found on the bone, and it is dried out, and appears black.
More in the treatment of fractures, at the beginning, consider the patient' accidents, and if you find by means of manifest signs that they refer to pain, then know that vomiting of cholera, ekstasis, loss of reason, confusion, fainting, high fever, and a similar appearance to these are not cured.
And if you do not hope for a good result from those accidents, then begin the treatment of them.
The reason is that if it has come to you in the beginning with pain and it is in winter, then know that you study the structure of the bone before the thirteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the summer days, then know that you study the structure of the bone before the seventh day, having left the skin intact from the bone, and that accidents occur as a consequence.
And if the fracture has already reached the skin that covers the neck, and it is broken in several pieces and cut, then know that you study the cut that has been made, as I have instructed you.
And it is that you examine the head of the patient to discover any fracture according to custom and method, and that it be slight on the skin.
And if it has happened to you, then you detect the bone, and let blood or pus come out with a caustice, and pause it so that the blood does not come out, and if it is sure of the flow of the blood; and then begin to examine the circumference of the bone and the removal of it.
And this should be according to one of two methods of operation.
And the first method is that you cut the bone with a straight chisel, and this is its form: And then you administer another one that is slightly less than that; and this is its form.
And then you administer a wider one again.
And then know the names of various chisels, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are narrower than others, and they are on the sharp end of their edges, and they are made of iron or steel.
And use them according to ease in striking on the chisel so that it does not hurt you, and then strike with it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you pierce in front of it before administering chisels; those are called non-deep knives.
And they are not called that way because those do not stop the term of the bone's head in water that is next to it; however, since the taravel has a round extreme or edge on the bone that is left, this resembles a small circle, and it prohibits being submerged and passing through the bone' structure.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these knives, as many as are needed for the bone' structure; except in the case of the head's extreme part, since its quantity in length and brevity depends on the amount of the bone' structure's smoothness.
And this is the form of three types of knives: The quality of piercing in front of the broken bone is that you place the knife on the bone and move it with a twisting motion so that it does not stop; then return it to another location, and pause it so that water passes through its width, if possible.
And then you insert a chisel between each part of the bone, and make it so thin that you can work on it; as we have said: provided that you remove the bone, or your hand, or another cause with some instruments that you will prepare for water, as tongs and forceps that are thin.
And so that the incision does not touch any cause of the patient's chest, keep all your caution.
And so when you have pierced the bone, if it continues to grow, separate it from the patient's chest as much as possible, and remove it, provided that you cut it with a sharp instrument like an incision, but more carefully than the others, since it is located in the area of the foot where there are other instruments resembling incisions.
And if any part of the small bones is left loose and unstable, then take that easily with a sharp instrument, which you will use for cutting; and then care for the wound with lime and smear on the ointment we have mentioned.
And another way of operating is to cut through the skin, far from fear, which was used by Guaglia and the knife in long strokes; and this is what he said: it is necessary for you to start revealing the fracture's break, as much as possible, until you have revealed that break and have paused there the tip of a slow and gentle incision, through which this is the form:
And it is that a rounded break is strong and does not cut into any cause, and an acute break is in two places ahead of each other in length, so that the rounded break is adjusted to the chest with its face facing the acute break in the bone.
And so you hit the incision with a small hammer until it is completely broken, and you will be sure that such an accident does not happen to you in any way, and if the medicine was the most effective for all people and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if it was sleep-inducing.
And if any cause is attached to the patient' s chest bone in several places, cut it with a knife at the end of the incision, and release it easily, because it is released by itself and does not cause pain or fear.
And if the bone's fracture does not penetrate into the chest, and what is broken or left out of the bone is its surface, and there are thin and sharp points in that area, then cut those points with very sharp points that you have prepared, in various quantities so that you can administer them in all places where they are most convenient for you and most appropriate for applying them according to what you need;
And when you administer the sharpest points with which to cut the bone at the beginning, and then use very sharp ones in succession, and do not stop until you have finished applying them all;
But in any of the other small fractures or subtle breaks, administer care according to what you need to correct it.
And that is why all those who have studied this art are not familiar with it. But he has shown us how to operate in great fractures.
And if the chest is stretched when you cut the bone, then take a cloth according to the amount of wound, and dip it in hot and oily rosin, and pause it over the wound' s orifice; and then take another cloth, folded or tri-fold, and dip it in oil and rosin, and pause it over the first cloth with great care so that the chest is not injured; and then administer a very thin fabric over it, and do not stretch it except by the amount of wound.
And leave that wound with this care for a day or two until you are sure that there will be no suppuration; and then wash it off and administer medicines that are superfluous, such as rye flour and bread crumbs, and powder of onions and aromatics, and similar to those.
And it is that you sprinkle the powder of these medicines over the wound when they are dry; and generally, administer all medicines of their properties which cause constipation and not chewing.
And keep your word that the wound in your treatment be clean; and is not in a layer of ointment or any other thing; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted on the patient' s chest, he corrupts it and destroys it, and it causes malice and evil.
And it happens in the patient' s head, and when it is separated from the bone, and more importantly when its treatment is finished, and it is blacker on its surface; and then consider, at that time, whether it happens to the man that we have mentioned, that you know that it is dangerous.
And if it does not happen to be black due to the medicine that is applied to it, and it is because of the virtue of that medicine that causes that blackness; then take a cloth of honey and some oil of roses. and put a cloth on it, and then pause that over the wound; and then cure it with the medicines we have mentioned to you in order to heal it.
Chapter III.
Of Restoring a Broken Nose.
You should know that the nose is not broken in two parts separately, and one of those small bones is separated from its cavity, or one of those small bones is fractured, because there are two bones; because the break of the bone is cartilage-like, and it is not broken, but happens to the nose only a little bit of twisting and tortuosity and uneasiness.
But if one of the two small bones is broken, then insert a very small thing into its nose, and fix that fracture inside with a very small needle, and push it from outside towards the tip of the nose, so that it returns to its natural shape. And do it easily for you, and be careful not to hurt yourself with your operation on the man's face.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and does not reach that bone, then fix it to the tip of the nose with a very small needle.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make a similar shape for that.
And do not delay in repairing it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and otherwise, then wash it with oil to relieve suppuration.
And then insert a cloth hook into the tip of the nose with great care if the fracture is in one part, or with two hooks if the fracture is in two parts, and fill it with the thickness of as much as the width of the nose fills.
And I have said about the ancient restorative techniques that the hooks are wrapped in cloth, and they are changed every day, but I do not see them; provided that the hook is wrapped in album with oil of roses to harden cartilage. And then leave it alone until the bone has been fixed and hardened.
And some small bones are caught in the nose, instead of one, because they are wrapped in cloth of lion; and it is that you know that this fracture of the nose is very violent, and that the man' s life is not at risk from breathing.
And this reason is not necessary for you; and if you want, make one, and if you want, make two.
And if there is another suppuration, then fill the nose with wax in oil and rosin, or with a cotton swab in linseed oil, or with powder of onions and aromatics, and similar to those.
But if there is not suppuration, then take a cloth of lion and wrap it around the nose, and do not tie it too tightly; and place your hand over the area so that the nose does not move.
If the bones of the nose are broken or shattered, then cut them out with a scalpel and remove them with instruments suitable for the job. Then close up the wound, and treat it with oil that soothes and hardens it, as well as with ointments suitable for the wound.
And if there is a plague inside the nose, then cut off that part with calques and introduce lead tubes into it to make it sound; administer ointment for a while until it heals completely.
Chapter .iiii.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not out of place, nor has it been twisted so much that it is curved at one end; then its recovery will be easy.
And so, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert the little finger of your left hand into the mouth of the patient; and likewise, if the fracture is on the left side, then insert the little finger of your right hand; and push the fracture from the inside with ease towards the outside, with your other hand at the outside end of the bone; and hold it in place firmly.
And if the jaw fracture has separated into two parts, then cut away two strips according to their length on both sides so that you can restore the alignment of the bone.
And if there is a concussion or a dislocation of the teeth, then strengthen those which you hope will hold fast with gold, silver, or ivory; and place wax over the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it, and put on a large star-shaped cloth neatly folded, or a single weight according to its length; and tie it firmly so that it does not break.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and provide him with small sips of liquid.
And if you suspect that the shape has been altered in any way, then hide it and wait until the third day; and then adjust what is altered with powder of ash, milk-powder, or flour of chamomile, so that you will have to remove the wax from it, and place it on a woollen cloth.
Then, when it is stable and the position of the bone has not changed, leave it alone, unless it is painful and the fracture seems to be healing, for the fracture becomes stiff in three weeks.
And if another outbreak of fever occurs, then administer the oil that we have mentioned to soothe it and treat it; also use a poultice.
And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is a small fracture or a large one; then administer oil to those that hurt from the movement of their weapons.
And if the hole of the infection is small, then enlarge it with a scalpel according to the quantity of your need.
Then, when you have removed those that hurt, and if the hole is wide, then close it up with a poultice so that it heals; otherwise, place something between them that will prevent movement and allow oil to reach it.
Chapter.v.
On the restoration of the fork (furcula) when it is dislocated.
The fork (furcula) is broken in one of the three ways.
It is broken either in one piece or separated into two pieces, but not both ways, so that it does not cause pain; or else the fracture occurs when it is separated, which makes the recovery difficult, or when it is infected.
Then the operation on this is that you prepare two ministers; so that one may hold the fork that has been broken in half, and the other may extend the neck of the patient at the end that is separated.
Then insert the points of the fork into the teeth, so that it takes the shape of the patient's mouth, and not be in its little prominence or concavity.
And if you are too weak to hold the fork, then place a cloth or wool over your hand and hold it firmly; then extend and raise the fork and cut it with your hand above your head so that it cuts according to its length.
And if you cannot reach the end of the fork to the outside ends, because it reaches too far forward; then place the patient on their back and pause a small cloth over the neck, and hold it down with your hand.
Then the minister presses the neck muscles on the side that is separated from the patient, so that the bone of the fork is raised up to the place where it should be; and then adjust the fracture and insert the points with your teeth.
Then, if you feel pain in the fork, then cut it off and remove those that hurt with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then use an invention of yours with one of the cutters that you have already used on water, because you have held it aside from the fork; and this cutter can be made of wood or iron, of which this is the shape:
And it resembles a scythe whose concave shape matches this one; and its length should match what you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or the width of it.
Then its length should be suitable for the operation; that there are two ends like this, and one end is wide and the other narrow.
And if the outbreak of infection which you have cut off from the bone is wide, and be sure to treat it with poultice; then adjust the two lips of the infection with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear an outbreak of infection, then use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound's opening.
And if an outbreak of infection occurs, then dip a cloth in vinegar and olive oil, and place it on it.
And all this should be done so that the patient's jaw does not tighten; and therefore, when you see the ligature become soft or the stings are loosened, then adjust it and strengthen the ligature.
Then place the patient to sleep on their neck, and pause a little cloth over their throat, so that it does not touch their neck completely; but so that it is raised a little from their neck, and then raise the fork up to the muscle' position; or hold it at the end of the neck.
And do not remove the ligature if it does not happen in the place immediately or apoplexy, within twelve days.
Then replace the plaster if you see the face of it moistened by water, and adjust it in the constriction and restore that, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the femur is coagulated.
Then strengthen it and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some witnessed in some men is done in the period of time from that.
Chapter VI.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Shoulder Blade.
The spatula pie is broken in the place of the shoulder blade and are not broken from it but the edges.
And when the place of the shoulder blade is broken— and is broken in the middle of the shoulder blade— and is not known except by touching, then according to that it is the figure of the fracture dislocated I prepare it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all ways by preventing the which is possible.
Then place over the place powder of flour white of wool and stops lion; and place a towel doubled; and place on it a thin board according to the quantity of the spatula whole or less a little.
More if the place is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you fill that concave with lion's stop; and place the board according to equality.
Then strengthen it above it with a long handle of string tight and secure the board within that is not remounted from its place.
And consider the ligature in every day; and all witnessed that is softened, change it and strengthen the board if it is remounted from its place.
And strike the patient on his back slowly.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in .twenty-five.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligature, and that you know assuredly because that is of the bones of which the beginning is not wounded nor its dissolution.
And if you make a hole in the place of the bone heavy and put away from it the chisel, then you split it above it, and stop it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the femur of sadacio of apoplexy caut if it happens here.
Chapter VII.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Foot.
The foot some witnessed is broken in the middle of the foot and is broken therein and ends; but the extremities of it move therein because they are ciccadas and comminuted.
And of the accidents of it when it is broken in the middle of it declines to the inside and happens to it great pain, and difficulty in the hale, and hoarseness, and fortness, and vomiting; and is declared in it cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that it be raised above its two legs, and a cushion placed between its thighs; and press to the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it to the sides of two ribs, and slightly in the operation of it and in the equality according to all ways that are possible and convenient to water, within that returns the figure of the bone according to what has covered.
Then place over it the plaster and straw, and place a thin board of wood or of caligi and of its likeness in levitation, because you wrap that in cloth; and place with care that is not softened; and strengthen it with a string tightly; and consider the ligature every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
And if necessity causes that of it dissolves or pruziment, or pain, or apoplexy which happens in the place, then you cut off and separate that and remove the plaster and correct that what happens because of water by the way of curacio of it; and return the plaster, if many times to water the face; and adjust its constriction within that is cured.
Chapter VIII.
On the Restoration of the Ribs When They are Broken.
Know that the fracture of the ribs is made only in the large places which go to two sides; and of the extremities of it from the departure before does not happen to them contraction except by water because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling but is sought after with diligence of it through the help of others.
And the restoration be so that it is united with the ribs according to the possibility, within that is swallowed according to what has covered, and place the plaster on the broken bone with a board, if you are afraid of it.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines to the inside, then happens to it great pain and stinging, so that it happens to him who has wept, and by water because the bone is covered; and happens to it difficulty in being washed, and hoarseness, and vomiting from motion; and this is difficult to be cured.
Then the Ancients are made more intelligent by that with more effort.
And of them so that it says: Rest you the patient who engendered inflation and ventilation, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is driven to the inside.
More we should draw water by that it is not a cause of legueria to generate apoplexy if it happens; and if it has happened, then it helps to water.
And they say of them that it should be stopped from the ventose and come near to drink with force; and is similar to reasoning, but is feared that the ventose pushes away the excess to the place because of weakness.
And they say of them: Cover that place with wool which has already been submerged in oil if it happens, and let the board be placed between the ribs within that is filled, what has covered being united according to roundness; and be cured the patient with curacio of pleurisy of diet and of medicine.
And if violent constriction causes the patient pain and does not suffer it, and the bone pokes at the skin with burning, then they are afraid of the patient, then return that it break over the place, uncover the broken rib, and I take from it the instrument which keeps the ciphac, the reminder of which is preceded, and I write the bone according to convenience, and extract it.
Then place over two lips of the patient, if it is large, with a fire, and I cure that with plaster within that is cured.
And if apoplexy happens inside, then you cut off and throw into rosé oil and place over the place, and be cured the patient with water which covers the apoplexy inside.
And it should be raised above its legs on which it sleeps, within that is cured.
Chapter IX.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Vertebrae of the Back and of the Collarbone.
Some witnessed endvertebrae fracture in the bones of the collarbone, and seemly to those of the vertebrae of the back. And if you want to know if it will be cured or not, then consider because, as often the more of them are softened and stupified and dead and cannot extend them nor strengthen them with a string, and when you touch them with a sharp object, do not feel pain in those; then you know that it does not heal, and in their place is deadly.
And if they feel those and stretch them so that the said pain and stinging are felt, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will heal with treatment.
And if you see the spine of the neck appearing wet and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of him/her.
If you find that they are already softened, pay attention to the water that happens in the most (i.e., urine), and when you stand on their two legs, they have wind and defecate at will, some even turn over on their two legs and urinate and cannot, then know that it is mortal, and do not treat them.
But if you don't find any of those causes, the cause is better and lighter.
And the treatment of him/her is that you pierce into the spine at the back a bit hard, or put a string around his/her leg slightly tight, or apply heat to it; place some warm wool on the area to relax the spine.
And then place a soft, warm plaster on it and tighten it slightly; order the patient to rest and be quiet and not sleep on the part that hurts until it is healed.
If you find a sudden fracture of the bone or some cause that has already separated from it, then cut off what is broken from the bone and fix it; then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures if it is large; and then treat those with ingrown toenails, so that it heals.
But if it is the back of the leg that is broken and it is the end of the fracture, then cut off what is broken from the bone with the left hand at the back, and fix it with the right hand as much as possible; and then place a plaster and a splint on it, and if you feel pain in those, then take some medication for pain; and then tighten it.
And if you feel broken toes, then cut off what is broken from him/her and fix it; and then treat the wound with treatment that precedes it until it heals.
Chapter 10.
On the Restoration of the Hip.
The bones of the hip are so broken, and if they are broken, then their fracture is not but a common communication of those extremities that are broken and run along the length and decline to the edges; and the patient feels pain in the place and stinging, and the back is numb when the fracture occurs.
And the treatment of him/her is that you extend your hand over him/her so that it is over the fracture, which is the figure of his/her back.
And if the fracture is only in the end of him/her, then you take off that part from him/her step by step until it is put back together with his/her natural figure.
But if the fracture is long or has already declined to the edges of the hip, then you prepare the patient's belly for your treatment of that fracture. And then, when you have put it back together, place a plaster on it, and then fix the splint with string or rope that does not hurt or move the fracture.
And fill the cavity with water that covers it all, so that it is equal to it; and order the patient to sleep on his/her two legs or open his/her side.
But if you find an apoplexy (i.e., fainting), then you stop its extension and its treatment until it is calmer; and then return to the treatment of him/her, and tighten it like this while he/she cuts off what is broken.
And if you find a sudden fracture or they are comminuted (i.e., broken into small pieces), then you fix them.
Chapter 11.
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Hip.
Adjunct is what joins the rib to the shoulder at the top of the shoulder blade.
And if it is broken, then the treatment of him/her is in two ways, which are: the first one is that you take off with a sharp knife a small piece of bone from the rib, according to this shape:
And tie together the two ends of the bones with a string that is high up.
And place the patient on a wooden chair; and then take off the broken arm with a sharp knife from the top of it, where it reaches to the tip of the shoulder, joining it to the wood in that way:
And then suspend him/her by some difficult cause or other, or make him/her walk with a stick between his/her legs; and then let the patient sit down and feel for the pain in the hip until it stops; and then treat the fracture together with his/her own will, so that the fracture heals according to how it should.
The other way is that the patient is lifted up by his/her neck and suspended from the collar of him/her with string; and then order two servants to hold one another's hands, so that one holds water that covers the fracture with his/her hands; and the other serves him/her with food in his/her mouth.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you tighten it with string and on top of the fracture and on top of another bone with another string; and each of the two servants stretches his/her hands apart.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then cut off what is broken from the rib at mid-length on the wooden chair; and the other servant holds him/her by the shoulder, so that the fracture is held with the help of the chair.
And if the fracture is near the rib, then cut off what is broken from it on the chair; and then treat the whole hip with treatment that precedes it until it heals.
Take off what is broken easily and do the work, and then tighten it step by step according to how it should be; and when you have put it back together with treatment that precedes it until it heals, then treat him/her if there is no apoplexy  (i.e., fainting).
But if you find an apoplexy  (i.e., fainting), then wait seven days and treat it; and then place a warm woollen cloth on the hip, wet with water that is slightly cold, until the apoplexy stops; and then tighten it.
The way to tighten that hip is to place a plaster on the fracture, and then wrap a cloth over the plaster; and then adjust his/her arms over the adjuntory bone, and place your hand on top of the muscle.
And then wrap that cloth and tighten it over the adjuntory bone, so that the arm is in its place of bones, if this does not hurt or move the broken bone.
And then you use them as they are.
And that is why you place over the fracture the string that is thicker on one side and thinner on the other; and place between each bone the length of the string according to the fracture, adding three fingers to the length of the hip.
And then tighten the strings over the bones with the treatment that precedes it until it is tightened.
And your tightening over the place of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is longer, then make the treatment tighter.
And if you find the position of the bones and the treatment tighter as it should be at this time when you restore the member to its situation, then you have done well.
And if you fear an apoplexy  (i.e., fainting), then you wait seven days with treatment that precedes it until the apoplexy stops; and you have done well.
And now examine the member in all parts for three days so that it does not happen to the place by accident or inflammation, or is prohibited to arrive food to the member because of the flow of superfluity of constriction; and therefore correct everything according to what we have said.
And if you are certain that there will be no cause of such a thing, then do not remove the ligature but leave it for three days or more.
And his sleep on his back and his hands are on his stomach.
And pause on the assistant cook full of wool, and consider in all hours of the night or day that does not dissolve the figure of the broken member or that the ligature is softened, then correct everything to its virtue.
And pause the food of the patient according to the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is soft at the beginning and then becomes heavier as it is digested; and then cover that the food of him is fattening.
Now it is customary of the assistant cook and of the chest of the patient that they are strengthened in ten days; and then cover that they are removed and administered water and are treated with ointments which correct those.
And if the fracture is stiff, then you do not remove that ligature and the stakes within a day or within two months.
Chapter XII.
Of Restoring a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two locks; one is small, and that is the one which is hurt by pushing forward, and the other is large, and that is the one that is placed on the left of the small from the side where it has been hurt.
And the large lock is broken alone, or the small one, and both are broken together.
And when the small lock is broken above, then the restoration of him is slight, and his healing is quicker.
And when the small lock is broken below, the fracture of him is bad, and his healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Then if the bone that is broken is the small lock above, then it is necessary for the doctor, considering the restoration of him, to make a small incision with ease so that he is engualhat.
But if the large lock is the one that is broken, then he covers that he makes an incision more vigorously.
And if both locks are broken together, then you cover that you make the extraction of them with greater force.
And cover that you remove the figure of the hand later than the restoration of him and its extension on a cushion, and the pulse of the hand at its ends, more than all the others say, and that the ear of the patient is placed on a cushion rolled up.
And a cushion before him in height or behind him, so that the patient does not become uncomfortable.
Then the minister extends the arm from the side where it has been hurt to the hand of the patient or to the ligature, and another minister extends above it with care.
Then the doctor engages to make a hole in the bone as soon as possible according to the best figure that he can.
And if, in breaking the bone, it is not sharp, then you pierce with care all the needles in its place according to your virtue.
And if it seems to you that the fracture is not separated so as to be able to put a needle in it and does not correspond to your expectation in restoring him, then you go over him and do it according to the way which we have described above.
But if the fracture is difficult, I have already written a special chapter on it, and therefore take the cure of that.
And if an apoplexy occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you tie a cloth to the member with a string made of oil-roze and white wax, and it is moderate between strength and softness, and a tight cloth is tied over that one with a careful strictness within which the apoplexy has ceased; and then you remove the cloth and apply plaster prepared from powder of barley, and tie strings; and let the stings be placed at the sides of the fracture more tightly and more firmly.
You know that the number of stakes for the arm is six, or that the fracture is in one lock or in two locks together.
Then you place your strictness on the place of the fracture more strongly and more violently, and when it seems that you are remembering him at the beginning of the chapter, you place your strictness on the sides of the fracture more loosely and more softly according to what has preceded.
And the clothes that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and wet, and not hard or rough, and the string with which it is tied to the member itself should be moderate between strength and softness, so as it has been described above.
And examine the member and the ligature for three days. And if there occurs to you any cause for which it is necessary to make a correction, so as to put the member in water tail within which the pain stops.
Then release the member not tightly within which it rests, and then return the strictness.
And if the strictness is already softened and the bone has been set and seems like those that have been healed, then correct everything according to your virtue.
And consider if it is necessary to prohibit the food from reaching the member by the flow of superfluity because, as soon as it softens that one a little and leaves it not tightly for some days within which it comes out to the food, then tighten that one.
And if there does not occur to you any of the causes which we have mentioned, then do not remove it within about twenty days or so.
Then hang up the hand of the patient by his virtue of movement and let him sleep on his back.
You know that this fracture is restored in three months or in three and a half months, or that the strong one is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of it is according to the dispositions of the complexions and the dispositions of virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of Restoring a Fracture of the Hand of the Ma and of the Dits.
You know that to the pinches of the hand and to the knuckles of the fingers there is no fracture except for the one that appears at the back of them, and that it does not occur to their sides unless they are very much hurt.
And when it occurs to the fracture of the ma or at the back, then he covers that the patient walks before him with care in equality, and then places the hand on his chest.
Then the minister extends the broken bones and engages the doctor to make a hole in them as soon as possible according to good conjonction.
Then he covers it with plaster and tar, if an apoplexy occurs; then he places stakes above according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped that one in a cloth.
And if the piercing is in the inner sides of the hand, then make a bandage of cloth, and order the patient to tighten it with his own hand; then cover that bandage with a long one.
Then the stake should be applied to the skin in the cloth in which it is lifted, so that the stake is applied to the hand; and then tighten it according to what has been described above.
And if the fracture is in the outer sides of the hand, then he covers that stake above and another stake from the side where it has been hurt on the palm, so that the hand is placed in front of you and to the side; then you place your strictness, as it is rolled up, between the fingers.
And if any of the bones in the fingers are broken, if it is the one that has been bent, and it is straightened again according to its shape and tightly tied with a bandage, then pause the small right hand for so that the fracture is raised and not crushed.
Or if the fracture is in any of the other fingers, then it should be tied and supported by the finger next to it, or by the middle one, or by the index one, or by the ring one; or all of them according to continuity, and that is better; or pause over that small hand, as we have said about the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and those, the disposition of poultice cauterization and opposite - to the hand operation - that it is covered when any cause of those occurs, according to which the description of it is repeated from him.
Chapter 14.
On the Restoration of aBroken Bone of the Thigh.
The thigh bone that is broken and revealed is split and declared according to what it becomes in front and the superior pus.
And the restoration of it is done so that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on his stomach and on his face.
Then the minister extends all the ligament according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Or if it is next to the root of the thigh, then the ligament should be extended downwardly to the middle of the peter, so that the extension falls on him, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.
And if it is next to the root, then the ligament should be made to look like it is extended downwardly and the extension is made at the ends.
Then the doctor should join the bone with both of its ends together according to its natural shape and the joint is strong; then pause when you have made a poultice and compression, unless there is an accident in the member. Or if it happens to be in the poultice, then you should leave it for a few days until the poultice goes away, and return to your treatment.
The compression of it should be done so: when a hard bandage is wrapped around the fracture, and it is folded two or three times, and removed from him excessively; and then wrap the legs until they reach the thigh and the root of the thigh.
Then put a long rope between the thigh and the bandage that is next to the root on the ends of it, and make the rope go over the top of the bandage and under the other one; and then roll up the bandage and the thigh so that the excess part of the bandage is removed.
Then pause on the thigh in the place of that fracture with a small stick, and pause one of those under the bandage.
Then fill up the emptiness between the bandage and the thigh with soft rags, so that the compression is firm.
Then start with a strong compression on the middle of the fracture with three folds or four, and how much more you release from the ligament in the place of the fracture, your compression will be less firm and lighter and moister.
Then extend the two ends of the rope to the ends of it until they reach the shell of the foot, and tighten them both with the help of the other part so that the ligament does not come out of its place.
Then leave the compression on it, unless there is a problem with the member or poultice or swelling that resembles those; and if any of those problems occur, then correct it as soon as possible, according to what we have said about the thumb.
Or if the bone is thick, then you should join it according to what is possible for you; and if not, then put it under him and tighten it, and heal with water that precedes the healing until it is cured.
Some of these fractures of the thigh are strengthened by ligaments adjusted to its ends, as we have said about the assistant and the arms.
But, nevertheless, in the restoration of it so that there is no lameness in walking; and if it is restored alone, another water that is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that this one should walk with a limp.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in ten days or a little more or a little less, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexes and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the Restoration of a Broken Ankle of the Leg.
Know that the fracture of the ankle of the leg is better understood when it occurs behind him.
Or if it is broken, then there is only a crack or a break in the ends, and that is what causes pain or swelling, and everything is according to the description.
And the restoration of it is done so that it is joined at the ends of the bones according to what is possible by ease and ease of manufacture.
Then pause a poultice and pause on that stick if you are uncomfortable with it; and tighten them well to the water.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as to pause completely over any accident with water that is convenient for him until it is cured.
Chapter 16.
On the Restoration of a Broken Leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and it is called the thigh bone; and the other is small and it is called the shin bone.
And any kind of fracture occurs in the bones of the arm, and the restoration of it is done like the restoration of the arm by joining it together, and the operation is one.
And if two bones are broken together, the leg is broken completely.
And if one of the smaller bones is broken, the leg is broken in front.
And if one of the larger bones is broken, it overtakes that one from below, and that is of those causes that are not familiar to you.
Then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the ends according to that joining.
But, nevertheless, if the fracture of the leg is thin without any signs of pain, then the extension should be small and lighter, and rejoice in your strength.
And in the leg there is any cause of operation on the arm, and that is when you join the ends and complete all the work, then you will take the fists of a person whose right hand is smaller than his left one, and do not make cuts on the palms, and align them with those that are smaller in size, and long in length compared to the leg, and put them together from the root within from the top.
Then wrap each in two wraps according to the length of it, and pause one over the ends of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and place them together from the root within from the top.
Then join the two ends in three places of the two ends and at the middle place, because with this compression the leg is forbidden to bend on the side of the right hand or the left, and it is good position.
And a blanket has been given to him, according to the length of his back; and the blanket is placed on him so that he does not move.
And mostly you should pour water on the fracture, and when it has been boiled, it is called properly gout.
And you should consider the back every day and examine it closely, and you should guard against swelling and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then stop putting water on him until he is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot and of their treatment.
To the talus bone there does not happen a fracture of all; but to the bones of the foot there happens a fracture in some places; and to the feet there does not often happen a fracture, except in the middle parts of their legs.
And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot and these bones are raised up from each other, then place the patient's feet on the ground prepared in this way while you continue.
Then place one foot on top of the other bone that is raised, and then crush and push those bones together until they are back in their places.
Then place plaster and bandage on top of it, and place the patient's stomach on a small table that has two flat surfaces.
Then strengthen that foot with stretching and strengthening exercises because you have wrapped it in cloth and from other causes for which it is difficult to speak.
And after three or four days pass, then remove the plaster because you will believe that the bones are healed and straightened out, or if they are broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is to be done with caution.
But if any of them are broken, then restore those, and heal those in this way with eye and admonition to yourself in the restoration of the broken parts from the main. Then place the broken bone on a piece of wood according to its length, and place it slightly off-center; and leave the foot on the table that was recommended to you, and strengthen that with stretching exercises.
But if that broken bone of the bones is two or three or more, then you place it on a piece of wood wrapped in cloth, and strengthen the table at its lower end, and let the foot stand on one of the flat surfaces of the table so that it holds it firmly in place.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you consider all the causes that have been said to you in all the fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and stop putting water on him until he has completely healed.
Chapter  . xviii.
Of the fracture of the hip bone and the shoulder blade and the man's arm.
When the hip bone is broken, then make that woman's cut in the shape of an axe, and tilt it slightly to one side, and hold it back.
Then the woman should wrap her hand around the hip bone, and hold it in front of her as if she were holding an axe; and the woman is struck, and raise the two bones slightly at a time because all of them are outside until they come to the part where the hip bone meets that shoulder blade with her hand held up.
Then place powder on the two bones, and when she needs to urinate, he removes it with ease and urinates, and reduces it, and returns it to its first position according to her convenience; and then return that woman' powder to its first position again.
Then let it be for seven days or more because that is healed.
And if you want, take a little olive oil and hold it over the hip of him with a syringe; and push all the way through the hip bone, and blow into the syringe with force until the bladder is inflated inside the hip bone because the fracture returns.
Then let it be filled with oil and let it rest for a few days according to what we have said before, until it is healed.
And when the arm bone of the man or woman is broken, then administer to it with water that we have mentioned in order to heal and restore it.
And that water that is right does not often happen in these close fractures and rarely in the rest of them, but mostly it is meant to study and use this free will; because that fracture means to you in the main ways of healing and straightening it out, so understand well.
But if the man's arm is broken, then take an axe and cut it off at its base, and wrap it in cloth; and let it rest for three or more days because it will be healed.
Chapter  . xix.
Of the Restoration of Fractures of Bones When they are Swollen.
It is convenient that you should protect yourself from a fracture with swelling, and mostly if the bone is large like the femur or the shoulder blade, or similar to it, then you protect it and do not let it be moved, and stop putting water on it until the cause of the swelling has been revealed to you; as we have said before.
And if the swelling is due to an infection, then stop putting water on it until you have discovered the cause of the swelling; and if there is any other cause, do not put water on it.
Then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong the time of healing; if there is swelling, then stop putting water on it.
But if swelling occurs gradually, then stop putting water on it until the ninth day; and do not approach it within three days of that time because you will cause other accidents to happen.
But if the broken bone is about to come off, then stop putting water on it until you have healed and secured it with your own hands; do not let it hang for too long a time.
But if the extension is not prepared with the main parts of him, then you reduce that bone with your own hands, and it is a tool made of iron; its length is seven or eight days and its width is according to the amount of swelling; and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four according to its quantity because he will heal all kinds of fractures in general.
Then let it be done, and let it be done with a little simplicity so that it does not bend or break during the operation on him.
Then let it be done with great precision, and let it be held firmly in place with a strong hold; and most of the time let it be held between the fingers, and a little at a time let it be moved away from the body.
This is how to do it:
It is called in Greek "labra volentiaratelare", which means "to cut off the loose ends".
So that the end of him is raised above the end of the bone that is about to come off.
Then he places that end in a socket, and it fits into that equation.
Then he tries to fit the ends of the fracture together, and if the end of the broken bone is thin, and does not take the instrument because it has no power over it, then stop putting water on it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with water that we have mentioned, then cut it with one of the scissors that we have said before; or with an axe, in any way that is possible for you to do.
And now cut off what remains of the bone that has become sharp and slightly scarred.
And when the bone is reduced, and the hernia is removed, there will be a violent painful burning sensation, knowing that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then make a cut so that you confer great relief to the patient.
When your bone restoration is complete and you have applied black tar for the staph infection, and especially if it is during summer, and do not place it over the skin wound or any other cause of injury to it, so that it does not cause the patient to become infected or corrupted.
And now administer the necessary surgical instruments at the appropriate time during the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the skin uncovered as you cut it with a hook and use bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to hurt the wound with a broken bone, for the cold humors can cause painful gout in the patient's joints, and they can become corrupted or putrefied, causing death; but it will heal. And if the tight bandage becomes loose, it is different from the tightening of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear about the possible consequences of the injury, and you feel pain in that place, then do not use the surgical instruments, but wrap it up tightly with hard bandages instead of using those instruments there; and let it be.
And when the wound begins to heal in a day or two, let it be; then you remove the bandage that you had placed on it with water, and administer cold poultices, which is our custom to treat wounds, also applying tar poultices and calamine there; and let it be.
And let it be known to you that in the morning and evening you consider the wound until it is solidified and dried up, and that the member is prepared in such a way that the corruption will run from it to the extremities easily.
If the wound takes more than a few days to heal and it is not dried up or separated from the bone, then you know that there will be no good result from it; so keep trying. And of those wounds that separate and remain in place, and those that do not separate and put the member at risk of causing pain, cut them according to what you think is possible.
And if the wound becomes sore or swollen, it is a sign of infection and corruption; so be careful not to place any of those on it, as it is mentioned in its chapter.
And from that one in which you can speak your mind and present your request: when it is swollen, administer to the member also with the bone of the thigh and the support and similar things for those of the large members, and do not believe that a person has been healed by the power of God; leaving it alone until it heals, because a strong man falls for himself, and after three or seven days he may fall again; and then heal the wound if it is visible, and if not, leave it.
Chapter 20
Of the treatment of a fracture in its track.
This type of treatment is often seen in the recovery of a fracture injury, especially when it is near a joint, and its appearance is unusual due to the member's normal function; and a strong person will deny it movement.
Then consider if the injury is recent and administer those medicinal substances that have been used in it, and wash them; also, take some of its liquid or all of it, and apply those medicines there, also considering the patient' styptic, or water of wheat, or vinegar, and place it over the injury in cloth, and tighten it well.
And leave that tightness so that it does not become tight for more than a few days; and now remove it and repeat it, until the injury is healed completely; or place on it a layer of lead, because lead has the property of retaining all that is inflated in the limbs.
More if the injury has already turned into a wound and it is very tight and difficult to treat, and then cut it from the top with a sharp knife, and remove the excess and the prominent part, or cut that one with a small wound in which there is still some life; and then heal that one completely.
Chapter 21
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored, and then that member is soft and flexible, not stiff according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then that member is soft and flexible, not stiff according to its nature, then it is because of many reasons: the one is the diversity of solutions for the limb and the liaison of it with others; or because of excess tightness of the limbs through which the nutrient does not reach the member; or because of a lot of useless massaging; or because of excessive movement at the wrong time; or because of a lack of strength in the body and to weaken it.
And the treatment of this is to have food that gives strength to the patient and multiply the strength in his body, and administer baths; and put on him a loose gown and comfort.
And now place on him a light gown, that the gown does not take away from it the nutrition, or continue massaging with water, so that the nutrition runs and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22
Of the treatment of broken bones when they are restored in a twisted way and the operation of their removal is not allowed from them.
When the member is already restored in its shape and there are signs of a broken bone and a twist, and that member has become fat from its shape, but that member does not prohibit its natural function; then you will receive the word that this member has been newly broken.
More so there are many false metwits and restore the ones that have caused this, which is a very evil thing to do to man; and this operation is full of great danger and fear of the seal, whose destruction is fatal.
More if the claudication and the injury are recent, then they are broached in water that is soft, with herbs, also with leaves of aloe and raisin seeds, and with honey, applied to it; or with milk oil, which is made soft by adding a bit of wine; or with a mixture of fig oils, and applied as mentioned above; or with dried fig seeds, also applied as mentioned.
And sometimes it is dissolved with a gentle friction that is kept wet, and it is administered movement of the member from beginning to end in all hours.
More if the twist has already occurred in advance and it is very strong and has become a wound that must be treated with iron, then it is because it has already been softened, and the continuation of the bone has been dissolved, and it is cut where there is excess of the injury of that member, with a sharp knife, also considering the smallness of the knife, and applying ease in treating it and studying it.
Chapter 23
Of speech in a dislocation.
Dislocation is that the member has been moved out of its place, so it is prohibited from moving, and the figure of the member changes, causing great pain and major injuries.
And so when there is a dislocation, let them soon pierce to the point that it is reduced, and do not delay that reduction, for if it is delayed, then the dislocation becomes fixed and difficult to reduce.
And so do not cover or stretch it at the time of the injection, for if you do, then the muscles will be strained and spasms and pains will occur in them.
And if it happens to you, then let them cut the skin of the thigh, and place it so that the injection is not given until it is in place; and the limb is smeared with oil and water, and reduced easily.
And let all of the limbs be cleaned with the water in which the memory will come to its place.
And you have already ordered that the joints of dislocation be taken care of according to what is followed in fracture; from the top of the body to the bottom.
Chapter.
Of treatment of a dislocation of the jaw.
So the two jaws are not treated; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: that either they are taken out of their places by a small movement, and then they are softened a little; or they are dislocated completely and fully, until they are softened at the joint at the beginning, so that saliva does not come from the patient's mouth and his tongue is not wrapped up in it.
And if the dislocation of him is little, then let them return to their usual position by themselves for a little cause.
And if the dislocation is entire and full, then let them be reduced gently, and do not delay at all.
And the minister has the head of the patient, and inserts it between the teeth of one half of the jaw inside the mouth of him, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both sides together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the others are outside where they belong; and orders the patient to cease his jaws and return them to their places; and inserts the jaw and wraps it up until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of him is difficult, and mostly if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with oil and water, until the reduction of both is easy, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And then when they return and are wrapped up again, and the mouth of the patient is closed and is not softened, then place them on a cloth for protection, and let wax be made from oil and rosin; and let it be stretched easily with a soft hand.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and let the head of him be between two pillows, so that he does not wake up to the right or left; and do not force him to eat for any reason; have a hard pillow under him, so that when the pains are returned and the jaws are locked, then let him wake up who wants.
And let it be administered easily, and do not work on the opening of the mouth before eating, drinking, or speaking; so that the jaw is locked and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and are not returned to their places, then let sudden fever and frequent vomiting occur, and let strong pain arise in the abdomen of the patient, and strong diarrhea.
And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and let sudden death come to the one who experiences this in five days.
Chapter.
Of reduction of a dislocation of the clavicle and the end of the muscle.
The furcola is not dislocated from behind by its continuity with the leg; and some are dislocated at the end outside, and this is announced to the feeling.
And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and stretches his arms. Then cut the place with your thumb firmly, for it will return.
And then place on that ointment and cloth, and strengthen it.
Then the end of him that seizes is not dislocated in any day; then let it be reduced and wrapped up according to what we have said, and according to your apparatus.
And then place on that ointment, and cloth, and tighten it, and order the patient to stay quiet and at rest until he is healed.
And in this cure, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter.
Of reduction of a dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated unless it is according to three ways, of which one is dislocated at the end of the rib at the beginning; and the other two are dislocated at both ends.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the end of its rib, and this is not difficult; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated before by nerves.
And most of the time it is dislocated and goes out from behind at the beginning of the rib, and most of the time it is dislocated slightly; but in those where the flesh is thick, it is dislocated easily; but in those where the flesh is little, it goes out with difficulty.
Then sudden pain occurs in some men by a blow or accident, and the muscle of him is torn from its place; and it is recognized by the pain that has already been dislocated.
And then let them not be too worried about him, for you are already relieved from worry; and proceed to the cure of him.
And it is clear that the dislocation of him is at the beginning of the rib; but so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other, for you see a great difference between them; and you feel a depression in the top of the muscle, and to the patient's ear, he cannot reduce his jaw to its place by all his movements.
If it is dislocated, then let them feel a firm touch, and do not be afraid.
And of this dislocation, a slight reduction is made when it is fresh, and the patient is child.
And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to the top of it; and then places the ties on both sides of his rib at its end, and tightens it with force in its place; and the minister raises the patient' hand, and extends it forward; and then places the ties on both sides as they return slightly; for they return easily.
And if, by the way that I have said, it does not return, then let it be from the beginning where dislocation occurs; and let them be bathed in oil and water, and let them be given a massage with hot stones; and let oil be applied to the whole body as if they were being stripped of their clothes; and let fenugrec and mielot be added to the water, and administered.
And then the patient is placed on his back and his legs are raised slightly with cloth; and the doctor tightens it with force, and waits for him to relax; and he places his leg on the spine, and lifts the top of the muscle with his hand, and throws the patient' head so that it does not touch the ground, and another minister holds the patient' head, so that it does not touch the ground either; because this one returns to its place quickly.
And if you wish, reduce this second in such a way: and it is that you being present a man who was longer than the patient, and stood on this side of the latter, and entrenches his muscle between the titillic of the patient and raises the titallic of him to the split within that the patient be suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the splits of his belly. If the patient is loose, then know that another cause is suspended, so that this one, for so much as the dislocation returns soon.
And it is reduced with care according to another way: and it is that he be laid on the ground a pole long enough whose top be round of form, thus with a mortar's head, that not be thick nor thin, and be placed from behind the patient; for they are placed on the top of the pole lions' skins, and the patient stands according to its length, and his hand is extended from behind him at the split; and his legs are extended from the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of him is difficult for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole whose quantity be in its length of two brases, and its width of four dizes, and its thickness be separated in the preon of the titillic according to this form:
And they are placed on the top round skin is tied on the pole so that it does not slip the patient.
And they are placed from behind the titilic of the patient, and his hand or his leg is extended on the pole within the splits, and it is tied the pole on the helpers and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then they are placed the arm on a step according to its width, and his hand is extended from behind him at the splits, and the other side is suspended from the other side, because the joint returns soon.
And with the instrument of him is completed according to each way that it is possible to you, and then know that you leave from behind the titilic a length of wool; and they are placed a paste prepared of mortar' dust and white of egg on all the muscle, thus being turned down it, and then tighten from behind the titilic with a force; and the joint is turned over the paste, and his hand is joined to its neck, and it is tied, and not be loosened his hand for seven days.
And then that the patient's food is little placed, within that the member is comforted, because it has been longer to its cure.
And then the food is given more often than seven days or it is exercised a movement; and if it stops and does not be softened, then it already is healed.
If the joint is dislocated there are seen by moisture that happens to him or for another cause, then know that in this one is administered cauterization with three cuts according to what was said before in the chapter of cauterization.
And if all this is not done and seven days are passed it is separated the joint and the cauterization and the stricture are reduced on him some times, and it does not be fixed and the skin and not can raise that arm at the splits, then know that its nerves, which are to the top of the muscle, already have been cut or extended or softened; and you know that the joint will never remain in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is done deves the foot and the nipple or the splits behind, the reduction is made with an impulsion and an extension to the more, within that it returns.
And be administered in that one another stricture, and cure that one within that it is healed.
And if it happens near the healing gravity in the member and delay in the movement of him, then the patient uses bath water that is separated by the gravity and returns to its natural form first.
Chapter.xxvii.
Of cure of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the hip' joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated at all splits, especially in the front split to the back, and the dislocation of him is not covered by your skin or by your touch according to some shape is dislocated, and when you adjust the hip dislocated with the hand with which you hit, then it is declared manifestly, because the joint is bent and cannot bend the arm, nor can touch on its muscle.
And then your heels, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before that it comes to him a puss of cauterization, because if it sees to him a puss of cauterization, the reduction is difficult for him, and fort painful does not heal completely; and especially when it is in the back splits, because it is worse of all the other dislocations, and of greater pain, and causes some times to die.
And the recovery of him, when it is that one possible to reduce it, is that his hand be extended with two hands, and its arms are expanded, and the sides of the body are over the hip and away from him, and he pushes the joint with his knuckles together or with the heel of his palm as soon as it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in the front splits, then return this way that it doubles his hand with his own hand, within that it hits on the hip with the heel of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer violent extension and do it hard.
It is that two ministers extend the arms, and have him a puss of two ministers for so that it does not be turned again after extension.
And then they are turned the arms before all its parts, because they are wrapped skin that is folded long on his hand, or joint.
And when the body touches the joint with his hand, anoint that one with some oil for so that it is those causes which help in lubrification of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with a violent impulsion as soon as it returns to its place.
And then the reduction of him is placed over that paste in which there is rigor and execution with white of egg, and it is extended with a force downward, and his hand is joined to its neck, and it is left for some days.
And then it is separated; and if the joint is formed in its place, then your hand separates the joint from him and leaves that one.
And if you see the joint is not stronger, then your hand iterates the paste and the joint, and leaves that one for some days within that it is extended; and then separate that one.
If it happens near the reduction of the joint gravity, and the disposition of him is in movement, then administer bath with humidity and a subtle friction, and compression within that it is separated; or pause on the joint with a weight, so it is left from movement; and then tie it, and leave that one for a day and a night. And then tie that one, and put that one in bath; and when it is warm, then your hand rubs the joint with a strong friction, and then iterates on that one with a weight, so it is heard a noise of movement, once, and the second, and the third; Corruption has already come about on the denouement of the bath, unless it is liminary.
And if you wish, pause on that cow' split with wet and sharp friction against him; and you make some times to it, because that one is wet and reduces its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Shoulder, if it is at the joint where the arm meets the body.
If the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction (re-position) is slow, and conversely for the other joints; nevertheless it is necessary to hurry in reducing it at the moment when it has been displaced, before a lump forms or an ulcer appears from the impact.
And for reducing the dislocated shoulder; you should place the shoulder of the patient onto a table, and have a minister extend the patient's arm, and the doctor places their hand or palm on the joint, and pushes gently to bring it back into place.
However, if the palm is already held by the patient towards their stomach, then have the patient extend their arm onto a table for extension and reduction; but if the dislocation is previous, then hold the patient's hand firmly upon the table, so that the doctor's hand rests on the joint in question.
And if it returns soon, then it is good; but if not, then strengthen that one with plasters while there is an ulcer; and do not repeat this, for unless the reduction is quick, it will not work and it will not be possible to reduce it except by waiting a few days.
However, the Roman joint is second only in its tortuousness; and there is no cause for the patient to feel weak, but rather their muscles are relaxed and do not hold themselves; then you should know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and it is not possible to treat them except by a strong cauterization near the joint and firm pressure thereon; then apply some cause.
Then, if the malady returns after having been remedied with plasters, then allow it to rest and strengthen for a few days; and then remove them and exercise the hand.
But if the movement is excessive and causes pain, then have that one rest with their hand in water and apply friction to some areas, so that it feels better.
Chapter 29.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Fingers.
Some joints are dislocated at their very beginnings.
And when any finger of these is dislocated at the joint with the palm or at the base of the finger, then bend the finger and push it back into place, so that it does not return to its original position.
Then support the end of the finger, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then hang that one up and extend that joint so that it may be reabsorbed by the body in a day or two.
And when the pain subsides, then follow the previous instructions, and do not stop exercising the movement, and keep it extended at night; and make sure to be patient.
And if it is dislocated at the base of the finger, then bend that one back, and follow the same instructions as before; and if it does not improve, then apply a different treatment, so that it heals.
And in the same way, if it is dislocated at any other joint.
Chapter 30.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Vertebrae in the Back.
And when a dislocation of the vertebrae in the back or neck occurs completely, and one or more vertebrae are dislocated from their position, then there is no cure for this patient; death comes quickly.
This is to say that the patient's vomit can be forced out of their will, and they cannot hold it in; or several members of the body become weak, or two limbs or two arms are dislocated from their joints, for some limbs or two arms are dislocated from their joints. For some limbs are dislocated from their joints and fall to the ground, and some limbs become withered.
Then that one has already fallen in four parts behind; this is called a "gelbow".
However, the cure for this is that you should consider whether it has happened because of a disease of the body; because in this case there will be no cure or healing for it completely.
However, in those that happen by accident or impact or seem to be affected by them; the ancient books speak at length about their cures, some of which do return after a long time has passed, and others are new creations made from an instrument that is not usually used; one that I have found useful and that I will share with you.
And those cannot be cured except by water; that is what I have recommended.
And the patient be placed on their face, extended over a table with their feet hanging over the edge, and a wet instrument held near their toes.
Then a long stick be placed on the ground at the end of the foot near the heel of the patient's hand, and another one held up by their toes in the other end of the table.
The minister should hold the stick, and not be placed in a pit; and another minister should hold the other one in this way.
Then wrap the cap of the patient around your neck and let the little fingers touch the ground in front of you, and extend that end of the limb with the stick; and then strengthen the other limb by holding its extremities together and keeping them apart, and then adjust all the limbs, and place those on the other stick that is meant for the feet.
Then the minister should drop the limb onto the end of the stick, and not let them hang in mid-air; however, they should not be held like this permanently.
And the doctor should place their palms onto the spine with force, so that it returns to its original position, or they should place it on a table, and then adjust their legs onto the table as well.
However, if it does not return by this method, then you should find a table whose height or length is at an angle to three bras; and dig into the wall where I have said that it is convenient for the patient to stand with their feet on either side of the table. Then the minister should place the end of the table onto the spine, and the doctor should place their legs onto the other end of the table, and then adjust it so that the spine is straightened, and then release it back into its original position.
And if you wish, then open the door by which one enters; and it is that the cap of the patient be placed at the back of two poles, whose length is a palm, and the cap of the patient in the back of two poles; and it is that the length between each pole be a palm, and so it is done in each pole above the ground, so that one can run back into the room, and someone stop them from running out by holding them on the ground.
And there should be a long stick that is turned around at both ends of the two poles; and it is that this long stick be held between the two poles, so that one end is at the door where people enter, and the other end be turned around to the back of the two poles, so that it touches the ground.
And at the end of it is a pole that forms the stick, whose length is a palm, and in the other two poles is similar to this one.
And tighten the ligaments that you have stretched in the foot of the patient in the bed where his head is, and the ligaments that you have stretched in his thighs in the turn where his feet are.
And place a servant in each turn and the doctor rubs the spine according to what we have said.
And then that the spine is returned and the place is closed, it is necessary to apply a dry and stiff plaster of white calamine on the back, and then cover it; and place over the plaster an ovoid or circular board whose length is three hands or more than those, and whose width is the amount that takes up the space of the swelling, and on the top of the spine.
And then tie with a ligature the member that we have said, and use the patient's nutrition for it to heal.
And if there is any imminence in the place at the end of the cure, then when the medicine that softens and smoothes has been administered to the patient for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is given in that place a plate of lead.
And in some cases there is imminent danger in the last of the spine of the two, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you have already mentioned because it does not require that medicine to be given to it, for it would make the patient die.
Chapter 31.
Of Cure of a Hip Joint Dislocation
Know that the hip joint and the muscle joint do not cause anything except dislocation when they move slightly and have a cavity, and those who happen to them are not like those who happen to other joints of small movement and curvature.
And the hip joint is dislocated according to four ways, because it is dislocated in the inner parts, or in the outer parts, or in the front parts, or in the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated in the inner parts, and rarely in the front or back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it in the inner parts is that when you adjust the patient's back with a curve, it becomes longer and the nape is closer to the spine, and the patient cannot bend his neck as it is stuck at the top of the thigh.
And the sign of that person who has dislocated his hip is in the outer parts, that is, if he has an accident, his opposite will be like this accident.
And the sign of that person who has dislocated his hip to the front is that he expands his back according to the complement, but moreover he does not bend that pain which is in the nape, and if he walks he cannot reach the front parts; and his urine is repressed and his skin becomes swollen, and his walk is on tiptoe.
And the sign of that person who has dislocated his hip to the back is that he does not expand his nape, nor can he bend that neck which bends his back more than its opposite, and his back is shorter than the other, and his skin becomes soft, and the top of the thigh is the place.
But the reduction of these spices of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been cured with that medicine which you have recommended to administer to it and arranged according to its position; then it is not a cure of all. And then it does not require that medicine to be given to it, for it would make the patient die.
But in that person whose dislocation is recent and is one of the four species of dislocation, you should bind him so that you restore the joint to its inner parts and outer parts, and place him on his right and left sides, because it returns with great force and does not require another cure.
But if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong servant and extend the patient' back from the front part, or between his legs, or with a ligament that is tied above his spine; and another servant extends the patient' hand from behind, so that it touches its opposite leg at the tips of its toes; and place another servant below the spine, so that it does not touch its opposite leg. And then tighten the ligament on top of the spine, and hold the server's hand with a strong grip.
And it is extended from him or from the inner part to the swelled part, or from the back part to the hip joint.
And it is all of those in one way that the patient is lifted by his head to the ground and his feet are hanging.
This species of extension is specific to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to the medicine that we have said, it is good; otherwise, then all species of medicine that describe the cure of themselves are necessary.
In the reduction of itself when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, then the patient is raised on his back; and place the ligaments on the top of the spine in that place where the top of the thigh is and where it is swollen; and extend the ligament behind the hip joint to the front part of the thigh.
And another strong server takes hold of the patient' arms, and extends his back part by violent extension, because that returns to its own place.
And this cure is the lightest specific cure with which this member is reduced from the other species.
But if it does not agree with you and does not obey this cure of all species, then bind the two legs together with a strong ligament on both sides of the hips and on both backsides.
And be the length of each one of them as much as four fingers, and be the patient' back extended more than the other by two fingers.
And then the patient be suspended on his head, and be high up; and be the length of him from the ground as much as two arms.
And then order a strong youth to lower the top of the thigh, and another to raise it high on the patient; and the other youth lowers the thigh with an iron girdle because the joint returns to its place with great speed.
But in the self-reduction when it is dislocated to the front parts, then the patient remains on one leg according to what we have said; and be bound tightly on top of the spine itself and on its feet.
And two youths are placed, one on each side of the patient, and another on top; and place strong fust between the thighs of the patient, so that it is not dampened by it; and place it in such a way that the extension to the front parts is not pulled out.
And each servant extends to its part, and the doctor covers it with his hand according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then the back is extended slightly; and it follows this account of the story about the puget; and the doctor places his right hand on the patient' spine, and then turns that hand to the left, and another to the right, and so turns those two hands, and places a strong girdle around the patient' neck; and thus it is bound tightly.
And if the dislocation is at the front of the legs, then do not cover that the patient is extended to the front legs, and is raised above the ground; let be that it is placed on a hard surface, so that the examination if the broad of him is dislocated at the sides outside, according as that we have said about the Jasement of him over two broads; and it is over his face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no danger.
Then let be administered a compression with table on the place which you have the junction.
And when the reduction is completed according to that you— and the signal of the reduction of him it is not covered up to you, and it is that you extend two broads of the patient, and when you see those enguals and the patient extrenh its broad and expands that one of his excuses, then you will know that the member according to that you is returned— and then you adjusts two cushions and pauses a pad and extrenh a cloth so that the broad is not mauguda in any of the sides; and attaches the patient to rest for three days or four.
Then return the ligament and the pad, and compare one broad with another.
And if you see those enguals in your hand, then know that the dislocation already is closed, and let leave the patient to go away.
And if you see any cause of mollification, then you returns and pad that one, and extrenh it that according to your first stretching, and leaves that in three days.
Then return that one, and let that one wait to walk on every side of some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the foot.
The foot is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated at the sides outside, and inside, and at the front legs more than at the back ones; and is not dislocated in front.
And the signal of a dislocation of him is that you command to the patient that it applies its broad to the cushion; then know that the foot is dislocated.
And the restoration of all ways of him is that you pass over right the patient, then extends its broad, if it can on this one; attach the two to the face of him, and pause the foot of him between the two feet; and if it is necessary that you pass over those between the two feet over the foot of him with strength, and other minister extend his foot until the foot returns to its place.
And the signal of a cure of him is that its broad attaches to the cushion with a levitating non-laborious.
Then return that one and pad that one, and if it is necessary attach the broad to the cushion, and if it is necessary pass over those by means of a cloth for three days or four, and then return them.
And does not use the patient to walk on every side of some days, until it is healed and comforted.
More if the reduction of him to you is excused, then administer a strong compression with the ligaments in the cure of the foot preceded a narrative.
Chapter.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the ankle.
The foot sometimes gets up by small removal, and sometimes is dislocated according to complement, and the dislocation of it is made at the sides inside or outside.
And the signal of a dislocation of it is that you see the foot inflating according to the side where it is dislocated.
More if the cure of a removal of it is of easy recovery, and it is that it is extended with ease to the side and enguals until it returns.
More if the cure of it is made according to complement, do not make right the patient, and has another minister strong and valiant of the side behind the two of it in its place.
Then return to you on the right foot of the superior part, and on the left one of the inferior part in the place of the nail.
Then return the foot to you on the right side, and then on the left for two times, and if it is necessary extend it on the left side; and pad with the right hand opposite to the broad that is working.
Then make two times according as we have counted.
Then return the foot to the broad on the third time, and you are in the nail.
Then return on one time or two according to this way, and if you see the foot engaging, is good; and if not, then perform again the operation, because that one returns.
More if to you it is prohibited to reduce the foot according to water that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on its two sides on the ground, and extend a cloth mot in the ground, and let it fall between the cushions of him, and you have wrapped over him with a drap so that he does not come out the patient.
Then the minister of him holds its cushions, and another minister extends the foot to his side or to the ligament that it lies on the back of the foot; then extend that one any minister against extension of the broad of him, and the payssel is extended between the cushions of the patient, keeping that one so that its toe is not drawn out at the sides outside its extension.
Then the doctor enguals the dislocation with his hand, and another minister holds the cushion of him on the sides, because the dislocation returns with ease.
And if it returns the dislocation and is declared to you the cure of the reduction of him, then pause pad that one with a strong compression, and attach the foot to the broad.
And if you are afraid or watch out of the nerves which they are behind on the foot, because the ligament over that one is not violent and that one strongly.
Then leave that one for two days or three; and if the ligament is mollified, extelh that one.
Then return that one in the third day or in the fourth, and prohibit the patient to walk on for ten days. More if it is forced to go on a space that one, does not need that the dislocation is over him dissolved and corrupted, then return what it is cured.
And if it happens to him an apoplexy of caution, then know that you administer in the cure of him here where we preceded our narrative, in another place of cure and of preparation, until it is re-raised.
Chapter.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the toes.
And that which is dislocated is engaged by little removal is difficult, and this one before it is easy.
More if the dislocation is in two of the feet, then know that you pass over right the patient his foot on a place on the ground or on a table, and is being there like this one goes away.
Then return the feet to you, and pause the two feet on this one that it inflates from the joints, and if they are not engaged, then return them.
Then pause the stomach of the foot on a table that it holds all the foot, to which are two tops, and then tighten that one with a strong and firm compression for three days; and then return that one and make that one rest to walk on every side of some days, until it is engaged and if the recovery is assured.
Chapter .xxix.
About the different types of fractures that may occur due to pain or injury.
When any such cause occurs, and you attempt the cure of that and the restoration thereof, be mindful that death may result.
And do not presume to undertake the cure of it, but he who is skilled in the art, long-suffering, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not impatient, and who uses remedies that yield only somewhat, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but addresses himself to the patient with hope for salvation from destruction, with relief for the illness, and where there seems to be some hope. And then endeavor as much as possible to restore it at the very beginning of the cause, before it develops into a plague.
And then if the member returns as it should, then administer the remedy that yields only somewhat and cures the plague associated with it, using the enguenttes desiccatius.
And if the fracture is caused by a dislocation and the bones separate, then you should attempt to set them back into place, and perform the procedure of simple malady on those that precede in location to those that occur in the body.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that instrument in the ways of terror according to which I precede you in predication; for you should desire your own Creator, and persist more firmly in your glory, and offer up more prayers to your true God at all times. Thus ends the words of Al-BuCaSim clearly explaining what God wills. Amen.
