O son, I give you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, to its completion by its consequences, and for its explanations, and for its clarifications, I see that I have pleased you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hand, that is, surgery.
Since the work of hand is laid down in our region and in our times entirely deprived, so great perils the science of it, and its evidence remains; and they did not come from it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which changed them to error and confusion within that they are closed the doctrines of it and is extended the force of it and the art.
And it is seen to me that I have revived that in the order of this treatise in that second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes by addition of the declaration, and by preparation, which cause is necessary.
May the cause why a good craftsman does not excel at his work in this our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that he has to be exercised in the science of anatomy which connects Guaria within that it knows the movements of the limbs and the shapes of them, and the connection and separation of their; and had the consciousness of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the name of those, and the grace of them; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of emission of them.
And therefore say I that a certain word is called a monkey, less in the work small, and more in the art of hand.
May we have already said in the entrance of this book; for who does not know that I have told you about anatomy, it is not evaded that does not fall into error by which men die, so therefore I see many of them, because some are formed in this science and get themselves of that science, and those experiments.
For I saw a doctor of medicine and tried to see that he had made an ulcerous abscess on the neck of a woman, and had cut some arteries of the neck so that blood flowed out from it, but the woman died among its most.
And I saw another doctor who said that he would drink a pill from a man which had passed in his state, and the pill was large, and came to him and dried up that pill with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have called to be drawn out that, and I saw that because of the size of the pill and the disposition of the patient knew that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a salary from our lord of his territory by surgery, and went to a black cast that was his fracture in the crotch; and prepared the doctor, drew out the fracture, on the skin, with powder and needles with strong stretching, and did not leave it on the skin breath.
Then he removed it according to his desires, and then he prayed, and then he left by some days and commanded that we remove the ligament; and so it came in that the crotch and the foot hole ulcerated, and came to ruin.
And I was called to it, and prepared myself to remove the ligament, and achieved peace and no longer feel his pains.
May however the corruption had been confirmed in the member, so that I could not restrain it, and did not cease to walk the corruption in the member within that the patient was in danger.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous ulcer, and came to burst after some days, within that the evil of it came out on its lord.
That is because the cancerous wound is pure of melancholic humor, then it does not cover that it comes to him by all means, but that it be a member which you suffer that of all is host.
And therefore, son, it is necessary that you consider the operation of hand to be divided into two sections: one in the work which is associated with health, and the other in the work in which there is danger in its most dispositions.
And I have already exhausted it here in all places of this book where victory operation is the error and the fear; so that it is necessary for you to keep it and to leave it, so that the pages do not rob the way to speak and to disappoint you.
And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your evils with kindness and firmness.
And you use the best way by the grace of God to get to salvation and to praise glorious succession, and leave behind the terrible evils of difficult healing, and keep your weapons from here that you make fear, so that you hesitate in your faith and in your name do not you run away: for it is left to your glory, and more in heaven and behind your sanctities.
Guaria has said in some of its instructions: "Do not treat bad disease, so that you do not know how to treat it."
And I have divided this book according to three chapters:
The beginning of the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered in heads, within the feet, in the forms of instruments and tools of cauteries, and from that it is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of cutting and perforating, and of vacuums, and of plagues, and of extraction of arrows and similar to those, completely ordered and arranged according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and cure of torメントo and similar to those; chapter ordered in heads within the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
That I say the quality of the movements of that cauterizing and of the elements of it, and in which combination is prohibited cauterizing.
So I say that the speech of the quality of the movement of cauterizing and of the element of it is long and prolix, and subtle by science, and hidden. And already from him to speak a great many of wisdoms, and disagree with them, and enough for me a little of their speeches, in fear of lengthiness.
And so I say that cauterizing confers on all universal combination, which is of one matter or another, except two combinations, which are combination of the tail of the first matter.
In the combination of the tail and the dry matter will disagree; for some say that cauterizing is helpful to it, and others say the opposite, that cauterizing is not convenient in a disease which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and is not convenient that the dry and the tail are cured.
And he says that who says the opposite, that by cauterizing is cured in all dry and tail disease which comes to the bodies of men, for when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of them to the combination of fire, it strikes out the bodies of men as if they were dried.
And I say by the speech of that, which has experienced here at some times to discover.
Now therefore I have learned that such a person does not come on this one who is already exhausted and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by the latter exercise, and has known the diversity of the constitution of men and the disposition of the diseases in their metheguses, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the space of time of those.
In other complexions, however, you have nothing to fear, and most certainly in wet and hot diseases, for all the doctors are agreed on those, and are not disagreeing in the cauterization of them at the beginning.
And know, children, that of the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and of the goodness of it, is that the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and does not hurt the other member to which it is applied except with a little injury.
The action of burning medicine reaches to that in the member which is blistered, and strongly brings about the coming of the disease in the member which is difficult to cure, and strongly annoys it.
The fire, for its sublety and for the goodness of its substance, does not do harm except that it is superfluous; And I am already acquainted with it by experience and by long service in studying the art on the truth of causes; and by this fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and their expansion through which they expel the diseases, demonstrated by philosophical argument, which would be more acute in your ears if I did not restrain myself from speaking for fear of being too long.
And know, children, that they disagree as to the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the injury by the time of accident is immersed in the joy of him who has the cauterization imposed on him, and more so if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, which do not suffer delay, since those which come with malice, which are greater than a little injury, enter by time.
And therefore do not be taken in by popular opinion or foolish physicians; for it is that those who are cured by cauterization are not recovered every time, and pause at the consequence of that.
And the cause is not to be feared then as it is believed by some people because cauterization is only a place of medicine which alters the constitution and dries up the humors which are the cause for which pains come.
But therefore, excessive cauterization over medicine because of the want of its virtue and the goodness of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
It is possible that the disease return at any time of the year, according to the constitution of the patient and the location of his disease, and the virtue of it; and because it is prepared in his body by the addition of the superfluities in it, and because it has been brought to him in its acquisition with food and things resembling those causes; but if the disease to which cauterization was applied is a subtle one in some member of few superfluities and humors, then, when cauterized for pain and similar to that, it may be possible that in his body it does not return that pain, but comes elsewhere.
And yet a popular saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and one which is applied to those who understand it not, for I believe that it is no cure which profited from medicine or from any other cause by applying cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine when we apply cure-all methods in some diseases, and those medicines do not benefit them, but at the end of the cause we administer fire to him, and it profited to that one. And therefore I understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the saying which is understood by the popular opinion and the foolish physicians.
And they say that fire applied to gold is better than fire applied to iron, and do not say this except for the equaling of the gold and the sublety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cauterization does not cause blisters, and do not say this except for the equaling of gold and its sublety; for I have seen and touched it so that it is not absolutely virtuous, because you are making fire burn gold, and it is not known to you whether you will make it brash or not, for it has been prepared to receive it. And if you apply fire to burn iron thus, it does not show you; but if you apply fire to burn gold, it turns it into ashes, and the artisan who works with it does not know whether he is going to blister or no, for he prepares himself to receive him.
And therefore fire applied to iron should be done with care and in a forward manner on the right side of the operation.
And I have arranged this chapter on cauterization according to the other chapters, and I have arranged those within it in order, so that they may answer your questions about them.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers to the cold and moisture on the service accident of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of soda and many fluxes of rheumatic fever, called rhumatism, from the head to the joints of the limbs and ears flowing, and many sleeping, and toothache and the gurgle, and generally all diseases that come through cold; also, by a similar way in those diseases.
The shape of this cauterization is as follows: that first you command the patient to be evacuated by a lacative medicine, with the head uncovered, for three or four nights, according to whether you require the virtue of the patient and his age and custom.
And then order him to shave his head, and then make him sit between your legs on a bench and place his hands on your feet.
And then place the edge of your hand near the edge of his nose between his eyebrows. But therefore, when the patient has spoken of his place, mark that place with a test; and then apply fire to it, and this is the form of it:
And then make him sit on that spot with his feet bent, in such a way that his feet are forced to move from one side to the other; and you turn him.
And then raise your hand slightly and look at the spot; and if you see any quantity of hair fall from the head, or if it is cold to touch, then lower your hand again, and if it does not feel hot, turn him on another side; and if it does not feel warm, until he has felt the heat.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and let it sit there for three days.
And then make him sit in a covered place facing the wind, and let that sit there until the fire is extinguished. And then cure the spot with a fourfold medicinal unguent until it is healed.
And they say that as much as the plague of Rome raged, so many were blistered, and it is better and more refreshing.
And they say that it should be cauterized on the bone, and the cauterization should be done until the part of the bone is dried up.
And let this hair be cut that it ader to the bone; and let it be cured.
And others said that I should bring the cautery to the back, so that it enters strongly into the bone, and this is the form of an epizootic little boy: And they estimate from that place the vapors of the head.
And let this wound be held open for a long time, and let it be cured before it is healed.
But neither of these two kinds of cauterization has been seen by me in all of my experience; but the third, that of burning with fire, is more suitable to the head than any other, since it can be used without stopping until the wound is healed completely; and this is true of every part of the body, especially when the skin has split.
And the kind of cauterization first is more saved and better I know; and from that house, and work, I know salvation.
Capitolo Second.
Of the cauterization of the head.
When in the whole head occurs a chronic and long pain, and water is present in the patient's head, and uses of irons and of caltks and of capipurges and of emblasters and of gualinas and of semblantz, and mainly if it has already been cauterized with one kind of cautery that they tell you and do not profit from another, consider that since the head of the patient is of a strong creation in its nature; and is not pleasant and causes great pain, then cauterize it with another kind of cautery that has not been used yet. And let this one be cauterized on the corner of his head with a cautery, so that the cord is broken. And let the cord be incised and uncovered from the bone the quantity that we have told you, and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place which is called the vas, -- and this is the place where the wind blows. And I will be pleased with it in this way, and do not uncover the bone, for by water the head suffers a great deal of pain different from the pain of all the other types of cauterization of the head.
And this cauterization in its place, since when the cauterization is made with one kind of cautery on the corners of the head and on the occiput, it is less painful than when cauterized with another kind of cautery on the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Three.
Of cauterization of the emigre (not ancient).
When the pain at the back of the head is hard, or is present in the feet, let the head be washed with medicine, and let another cure be administered, which I have said before in the cases of diseases; and if it does not profit from it, cauterize it with a sharp instrument, or with iron.
Better to cauterize with medicine that you take a dolce of gold, and scrub it and burn the extremities of it from both ends. And let the place where the pain is located be incised on the temple with a sharp knife, so that it is in its cavity; and let the cord be covered.
And let this be held down on it with a strong pressure for three hours; and then take the medicine away from it, and keep the wound open for two or three days, and let this be done to the skin over the place where the pain is located; and so let it be treated after a while.
And let that one be cured with ointment so that it may heal.
If you have them, take some of the medicines that I wrote in the two treatises about burning medicines.
Better the cauterization with iron according to this way:
And it is called a little peg, since the head is thus shaped like a peg; and in its middle part there is a small protrusion.
And let this be done to the place of the pain; and hold your hand so that it does not become dislocated the little peg which is left; and rotate the little iron rapidly.
And if the quantity of blood that is exhausted by the cord is so much as to make most of it leave the body; and raise your hand so that the artery which is left does not become dislocated, so that no flow of blood occurs.
And let the wound be bathed in salt water and let this be done to the place, and keep it open for three days; and then let the skin be dried with a towel, and let that one be cured with ointment so that it may heal.
If you see it, cauterize it at the end of the knife according to the second kind of cauterization; and be careful not to make an incision of the artery in this emigrant (not ancient) head.
Chapter Four.
Of cauterization of the ancient emigrant.
When you treat an emigrant with the cure that I have said before, and with the cure that I have said in the divisions of diseases, and if it does not profit from the cure, and sometimes for the disease that does not respond to the cure that I have said before, either with medicine or fire; then consider that you ignite the cauterization with a knife so that it is bleached, since this means over the place of the pain in a line of length corresponding to most of it, or less than that; and hold your hand so that it does not become dislocated the little peg which is left, and rotate the little iron rapidly.
However, it is necessary to you that you keep from the continuation of the jaw, which is moved by the chewing, and that the larynx does not become dislocated and the nerves which move it, and that it does not become paralyzed with a spasm.
And if it is about the preservation and caution of the flow of blood from the artery which is cut off, since in the cutting of it there is a danger, and mainly at that one which does not know what it is doing; and let the operation be carried out with iron at the beginning.
And I will come to the memory of the accident of the flow of blood from the artery according to your way, in your place of freedom.
If this disease does not respond to this kind of cure, and if the wound of the patient is tolerable; then cauterize it in its middle part according to what I have told you, and treat the wound with ointment so that it may heal.
If you see it, administer the cauterization that I have said in the chapter about stretching the artery with two knives; and this is the best kind of cauterization and most certain.
Chapter Five.
Of cauterization of the pains in the ears.
When there is a pain in the ear that stings and is treated with the cure that I have said in the division of causes which produce it, and if the pain does not subside; then cauterize it, and this is the kind that has no specific name, and this is its form:
And let this be done to the place of ignition, and let it be turned round in all directions; and if the pain is in either side of the ear, or in any part of it: And let this be done slowly with the cauterization of the edge of the ear little by little, so as not to burn the place where the pain is located with the fire.
And if the cauterization leaves punctures all over the ear, and this one; then let those places be treated with ointment so that they may heal.
Chapter Six.
Of cauterization for burns.
Burns which are cured and cauterized are only due to the spices that come by means of blood flow, according to what we have said in the divisions of the malignancies.
Avoid cauterization with the spice which comes out due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that kind of burn with poultices and sudores and no cure, then you cauterize the groin with three things: first, razing the armpit, second, a small piece from the thigh, third, the junction of two lips.
And suspend the little cauterization due to the opposite of the malignant exit, for softening does not take place except in that exit where the cure begins.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cauterium on the right side of the armpit, placing a small one over the top of the head, and another in the middle, whose length is according to the length of the foot, and then take your hand off while it is being burned.
This is the form of the cauterium, and it is especially due to the knife, the form of which is before a table. However, much more useful is that one little bit too often be applied to the surface; and let it be cut with a knife in place of superfluous crudeness.
Then heal the area with water that has been preheated until it is cured.
Chapter VII.
Of cauterization for ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy has occurred and you have not given your medication and the groin does not have a fever, then cauterize that with four things: over all the corners of the head; as well as the top of the head, according to what we have said; and at the nape. And the method of cauterization is done according to what has been said.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and then later; and let it be healed with water that you have heated.
Chapter VIII.
Of cauterization for oblivion caused by dry heat.
Then give the groin at the beginning with large poultices and small pills, whispering words of comfort.
Then shave the whole head of the patient and place on his nape with cerates described in the treatise of cerates.
And pause for some time, for that is a way to cauterize. Then heat water according to the medicine already described.
And if it is a good cure, then do so; but if not, then make three things on the back of the head, which are separated from the top of the head (the part that is more at the top) to the back of the head (the part that is more behind). Then leave between each cauterization a little space of the spice, and then heal the cauterization with water that has been prepared.
But if the groin is hot and bears water, then make the cauterization in the middle; and if you have added more, then cauterize that on top of the head.
Then heal that within which is cured; and let it be an olive cauterization according to the form given.
Chapter IX.
Of cauterization for paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Then process in the head with poultices and water as we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and cauterize that in the middle of the head, and on all the corners, and on the back of the neck, and three things on the cervical vertebrae.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body due to cold weather and the malady is severe, then cauterize that with four things on the cervical vertebrae, and further, within the meaning of the neck, and hold your hand. Then heal that area which needs to be healed, and let it be an olive cauterization.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is due to blood flow.
Then at the beginning of treatment, whips the neck of him to the right and left, and then with the other treatment that we have said in the division when the malady is severe and bears the pain of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not bear the medicines, then administer poultices and toffees in the mouth before water for three days, with food.
Then shave the head of the child, and cauterize that with one cauterization in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another on the top of the head; and on each corner of the head, make a mark with a knife. And if the malady is severe and bears a fever, then cauterize that with four things: on the cervical vertebrae and the lumbar vertebrae of the back; and let it be a softening cauterization within the meaning of the neck and the back.
And let it be an olive cauterization according to what has gone before.
But if the malady is in a child, then pause with a delicate cauterization according to this method.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and dry heat, then cauterize that with the things we have said when it is due to paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is due to excess and declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him water that softens the head according to the water that has preceded in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, and then make a small hole in the middle of the head, and pause that in the middle of the head.
And the malady is due to heat, and it has been kept for all parts.
Then pause with an ointment; and it is more fit for a sheepskin. And sear that over the fire by moderate heat according to what he has said when it is between him and the wind; then let him suffer when it is in the wind. Then leave that in the middle of the head of him in a circle, and allow him to cool down within.
Then make water with the patient once a week, one day with water that softens the head according to what we have said; or if you wish, cauterize that by making small points according to the order of the head, this is a special kind of cauterization that moistens the brain with equalization.
Then pause that with a red-brown ointment in the wind or in grey color.
Chapter XII.
Of cauterization for downward water in the throat.
When you have described the beginning of water in the throat due to the signs that we have said in the division, then begin and give the patient water that softens his head, and keep back all kinds of moisture.
Then make that taste like a bath by adding a little at a time.
Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cauterization in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two things on the temples if it is the beginning of the descent of water in two places, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in a single place.
Cut all the veins and arteries that remain tied up, and let the cauterizations be made at a certain distance from the temples in length.
And keep yourself away from blood loss when cauterizing; and if there is a flow of blood, stop it with some medicine that you may have at hand.
And I come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the exclusion of them, and be careful of blood loss.
And some veins are cauterized at the neck with two bones exposed on either side of two caustics that are burning.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and thoroughly flowing through the veins and arteries that are in the prominent place of the head, let it be seen that this is a superfluity of fluid mucus; then cauterize it with a caustic that we have mentioned in the beginning of water gushing into the eyes, and cauterize it at the place of the head, and two caustics in the neck on either side of the temples, and two caustics at the neck between the two bones. And if you have a feverish addition, then cauterize it in the whole length of the ear at the tip of the eyebrow with a small caustic.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cauterization of a foul smell from the nose.
When you medicate it with water that we have mentioned in the division and do not profit from your medication, then prepare and give the patient three nights' worth of liquid medicine; and then shave his head, and cauterize it halfway with a caustic that is slightly bitter. Then cauterize it with a nail caustic on either side of the eyebrows, leaving a little hair.
And keep yourself away from the fire so that it does not burn those.
This is the form of the caustic nail.
Chapter XV.
Of the cauterization of the softening of the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize it with a lunar caustic; and this is its form:
And if you, then cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little bit with two caustics in the whole length, and let them be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each caustic be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, according to the quantity that a third part of the eyelid is made small.
Chapter XVI.
Of the cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the hair is converted to small pieces and turn the hand of the patient.
When the hair of the patient is converted to small pieces and turned inside out, then cauterize it according to two ways, for cauterization or medicine that burns.
If it is a caustic of fire, command the patient to look at water that softens his hair, then let them be prolonged and spread out; and if he turns his hand, then you tighten the eyelids with a cloth so that it does not hurt, but his hair is born.
Then, with the hair born and spread out, then pause the head of the patient in the third position, and place your hand on the eyelids of his eyes with a cloth; and then trace the shape of a flash of lightning, and this is the beginning of the sign that corresponds to the hair.
Then place a clove in oil or a pitting agent on the eyebrow.
Then ignite the caustic, and this is its form:
Then cauterize the figure that has been drawn, little by little, until the surface of the eyebrow is burned and it looks like a flash of moss, all apparent at once.
The sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the eyebrows of the patient already lifted from the piercing of the eyebrow.
And then raise your hand and place it on the clove for three days, and then pause over it with a cloth until it is well. Then heal that with ointment, until it is cured.
But if, for some reason, the hair falls out and the eyelid is softened, then do the cauterization again all at once.
But if the hair is left in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and spread out so that the eyebrows do not touch the eyebrow.
But the caustic with medicine that burns is this: command the patient to look at water until his hair is spread out and turned inside out; then make a sign of the shape of a flash of moss, all apparent at once.
Then take with you the following: sage, fennel seed, and bitter orange. And add them together in equal amounts. Then mix those three ingredients together and add water to them, then make the mixture into a paste so that it is not dry; then apply the paste to the sign of the shape of a flash of moss, and place it on the patient's head in the third position.
Then place on it a small piece of the mixture and do not press it on your hand so that the patient feels the burning taste of the medicine, for the taste is by fire.
Then, when you feel the burning taste of water, then let go of the medicine and make it flow with fire or a cut; for the taste is by fire or cutting; then wash the eyebrow with water; and consider if the eyelid has been lifted in this way with it washed, then it is well; and if not, then return to the medicine on the place where you have not applied the medicine, and it will be well.
Then pause over it with a cloth until the eyebrow is well removed from the adhesion, and then heal that with ointment or another within which is cured.
And you should, in your operation, guard with diligence that the medicine does not fall into the eyebrow, and if the eyelid is softened by the hair falling out, then return to your medicine to the place where the eyebrow was softened, and truly so; and then turn back to the location where it is cured.
This is the shape of a flash of moss.
And you should know that the eyebrows of men are different according to their size and youth; and then, according to water, your contraction is made.
And do not hide the path of treatment for those who study this craft.
Chapter XVII.
Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal eye of the eyebrow.
When you heal the fistula with water that we have mentioned in the divisions of the eyes, and do not confer with your healing; then put a cloth on your hand so that it does not hurt or shake with his head.
Then place a clove in oil or a pitting agent on the eyebrow of the patient.
Then ignite the caustic, and this is its form:
Which is to say, as a shape of a cane or a feather of a bird, from one end to the other, where the caustic is made.
And if you see, let it penetrate into the other end. And if you want, let it come out with a pull.
But if you do this, then the wound will heal better.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry up that area. And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from it.
Then place the fire above it, and take care that your hand or the patient does not get burned, and then put the fire on the nose bone and destroy it.
And if at the beginning of the fire it enters into the bone, then it is good; and if not, then repeat the fire once or twice, as is necessary, and leave it like that for three days, and place a wet and dry substance on it so that it heals.
But if it is not healed after eleven days, then place an acute and corrosive medicine on it so that the bone is exposed and cut it according to what you think is necessary in the patient's chapter.
And another way of treating a fistula, which at first they said: "Enter into the place of the fistula and pour that in and then stop up that small crack from which it comes out: And put in that amount of molten lead; and then your hand with good retention, and do not damage the patient because the lead does not reach the bone of that; and cover what you have stopped up with albumen of milk or water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure."
And if the fistula is healed with water that we have mentioned in the fire and cure, then it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a trauch from the nose and to reduce the fistula to the nose bone according to what comes out at its own place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Cauterization of a Wound from a Stone.
Vivid spots may appear on the lips, and more often on the lips of children.
So if you treat those cracks with water that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not use your cure, then let fire pass slowly over it according to this form which it enters:
And its cavity according to the subtility of a knife.
Then place that slowly over those cuts so that the fire reaches the base of the cuts.
Then heal that with a sharp instrument so that it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth.
And if there is an apoplexy in the uvula or on the palate or in the teeth' roots, then it breaks out and bleeds, and then it becomes dry and crusted over, and then it forms a fistula, and then you treat that and do not use your cure, then place that slowly over the fistula according to the quantity which is received into the fistula, and then put fire on the trauch of the fistula, and let your hand be so that the fire reaches the base of it, and at the back of it make one pull or two; and then heal that with water that we have mentioned in the cure so that it heals.
And if the healing has come off and has healed, then it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and keep the bone腐した according to what you think is necessary in the patient' s chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the Cauterization of Teeth and the Softening of Swellings.
And if the swellings are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then treat those with medicines and do not confer with the patient, then place the cap of the mallet on the patient' s head, and place the fire's head on the shape which it comes out quickly, as if you place the jaw over the tooth and put a fire slowly over that, and let your hand be so that the heat of the fire reaches the base of the tooth.
Then lift your hand up, and repeat the fire a few times according to what you want.
Then let the mallet drink water from salt and hold it for an hour, and then stop it, because the loose tooth is fixed and the swollen gum is hardened and the corrupting moisture is dried out.
Chapter XXI.
On the Cauterization of Toothache.
When toothache is caused by cold or there is a burning or biting sensation, and you do not use your cure with medicine, then the fire' s cauterization is according to two ways: either cauterize it with cow's milk or with fire.
Cauterization with Cow's Milk: Take cow' s milk and heat it, then place that in a bowl of iron, and put the cap on it, and wrap the wrapper over the end of the tooth, and then pour the hot milk slowly over that, and let your hand be so that the milk touches the tooth quickly.
Then repeat that milk a few times so that the heat of the fire reaches the roots of the teeth.
And if you see, dip wool or cloth in the milk, and place that over the tooth, and then place the iron slowly over it so that the iron reaches the base of the tooth.
But if the cauterization is with fire, then you hold the tooth in your hand or in the mouth and let fire pass slowly over it so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient' s mouth.
Then let the fire pass slowly over it according to its shape, and place that on the tooth, and your hand with something so that the fire does not reach the patient' s mouth; and then make a little water because the pain may return or in that day or in another day.
And when that fire has impressed the patient' s mouth with its heat and held it for an hour, and then stops drinking water; and this is the form of the fire.
And cauterize it according to what you see fit.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter XXII.
On the Cauterization of an Ekzosthesis.
And if an exosthesis is made of slimy and foamy humors which do not submit to treatment by medicines, and you see the digestion of those slightly, then let fire pass slowly over it according to this form which it has, having two ends open so that the smoke from the fire can reach the other end, and place that fire over an exosthesis' s pus a few times, and if it does not agree with you, then place fire on the pus one time, and then stop it so that the smoke reaches the base of the exosthesis.
And if the exosthesis is small, then place the fire according to the quantity of that exosthesis, and let it be left for three days and place a wet cloth on it in the shape of a bandage so that it does not come out because of the smoke.
Then heal that with a poultice, and cover it with a bandage, and wrap it up so that it heals.
Chapter XXIII.
On the Cauterization of a Ration's Sores and the Constriction of a Throat.
When the humors come up on the membrane of the lung, and more often when that water is caused by cold, then it is necessary to evacuate the mallet at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that in the place where it is stuck.
And keep your hand off of the cautery's rod, and do not burn it from the rope except a little bit.
Then cauterize that with another cautery; the joint of the neck at the last vertebra. The cautery of him shall be sharp-pointed according to the preceding way.
Then treat that with oil that is preceding it so that it may be healed.
Chapter.
Of the cauterization of malady of the lungs and coughing.
When coughing and lung malady are of humidity, and the patient does not have a fever nor is it a new disease, then treat that with two cauterizations on the furcula in the places where they are wrinkled; and another cauterization on its middle location between two breasts; and the sharp-pointed cautery according to the preceding way.
And if you want, your cauterization is made with the pointed cautery that is called pointed; the shape of which you precede in the point of pain of ears.
And make points within the cavities; and treat that with oil that is preceding it so that it may be healed.
And then have three ramp; because of cauterization being one: according to this form, you can make three cauterizations:
Chapter.
Of the cauterization of tickling that is the head of the jaw.
When the jaw is dislocated by Lubricious humidity and does not remain in its hour of its return, you shall reduce its dislocation within that it may return to its usual place, and then, because at first it reduces the dislocation, and the hernia is returned on its sides; and raises the rope which is at its beginning inside the tickling from the back, to the two digits of your left hand, if the joint has been dislocated at the beginnings inside the jaw.
And have two cauterizations that have two heads; and this is the way of him:
Then cauterize the hernia within that it penetrates from one side to another; and then will come the figure of cauterization from four heads.
In some cases, it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason are the cauterizations.
Then return on the cautery' side of salt, and then make it adhere to calmness, and that member does not hurt for any time until it is comforted.
If the dislocation is at the beginnings and it is firm, then treat that with a sharp-pointed cautery or with a pointed one, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is rumbling and the malady is healed.
Chapter.
Of the cauterization of the stomach.
When there come into the stomach fritters and multiple humors within that it takes on its composition and they multiply to him, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then treat that with two cauterizations: one cautery leaves the foot for the quantity of a digit according to the cautery' shape, and two cauterizations leave the sides of the stomach according to that comes the figure of a triangular cauterization; and lengthen between those which are not adjusted so they will make a perforation.
If the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the two-thirds of the thickness of the hernia.
And be the figure of the cautery according to this form six additions, And if you want, treat that with a large cautery according to this form in the middle location of the stomach: and this form is a circle according to this form.
And be cauterized the stomach punctually according to that which of this cautery is frightened: and it is because you feel over the stomach punctually according to the quantity that you want to try, and then treat that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with the preceding cure so that it may be healed.
Chapter.
Of the cauterization of the frets.
When the fret hurts because of cold or humidity or coarse weather within that it takes on its usual composition; and you do not confirm it, then treat that with water that we have said and do not confirm it; if the patient is laid down on its back, and feel over the fret according to this quantity: and make three cauterizations according to this form on the fret of the sides of the neck, the hour before the patient goes to sleep.
And be the space according to that which each cautery is according to the thickness of the digit; and be the cautery according to the length of the right side.
Do not confirm your cure with a cauterization.
If the quantity of water that is put forward is according to half of the thickness of the hernia, and if it does not stay in place; and then be left, which has already extended its coysas, and raises its brasses.
You are able to make these cauterizations with a sharp knife, when it is subtlety and prudence in the art.
And keep your hand off of overdoing in the cauterization, and be put forward the thickness of all the hernia so that it may reach to the intestines, because the hernia here is subtle; and you know water.
Chapter.
Of the perforation of an abscess with a cauterization.
When there is an excision or abscess in the fret and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the fret or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the fret, the patient will feel a great pain and its acuteness.
If it is in the membrane of the fret, the pain is acuter and often it weakens the patient's medicines.
Then that the patient is turned on its back, and then feel over the location of the abscess; and then light a cauterization which is made according to the preceding way. Then treat with that and cauterize within that all the hernia is compressed, within that it reaches to the ciphac, within that in fire it is healed.
And then cure that with the preceding cure of other abscesses so that it may be healed.
And do not confirm that this form of cauterization is used but the one which you studied in The Art of Medicine and by which many bad diseases have been cured; however, sometimes it can be done on this operation, but mainly leave it to us, and it is better.
Chapter.
Of the cauterization of plagues.
They said that the small cauterizations of the chirurgery of surgery to the plagues are according to this way: and it is because you take from the razits of the chirurgery of surgery a digit that is long and dry, and be it according to the thickness of the digit.
Then submerge that in oil and dry it, then treat with a small cauterization on the place where the furcula is connected to the neck; and two small cauterizations are made on either side of the beard, one a little bit lower; and two small cauterizations are made on either side of the neck between the fifth rib and the chin, slightly lower; and another small cauterization in the middle location of the back; and one more on the stomach, and three more on the sides behind; and one small cauterization in the place where the two sides of the back meet; and two more cauterizations are made on either side of the neck.
And do not buy your hand from the cautery, because it is in the line of the cord in operation.
And already the servants say to you that they are servants of men who use a cautery like iron and fire, and place it in that place which is between the ribs, until we come to that apoplexy and it is forgotten disease, for thus have I said about the apoplexy of the baby.
May in this perforation with cautery is not feared fear because soon it will happen in the place of the fistula to which there is no cure.
Chapter.XXX.
Of the cauterization of the melts.
When you cure the malady of the melts, take care that you have not said about the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are right, one is that you make three cauterizations or four according to the length of the melts according to the figure of the cauterizes of the baby, the figure of which has preceded.
And be between each cauterize the thickness of a finger or a little less, and the manner of the cauterize is the manner which I have said in the cauterize of the baby equally.
And do not buy your hand from the cautery; and the malady be above its two.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cauterize having two vertiments, which causes I have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the cord which is in the end of the melts the one that stops the malady of the left.
And be your elevation with which you raise the cord according to the length of the body, so that they are made cauterizes according to the breadth of the body.
And bring together the two vertiments, ignite fire, in that within which enters the cord from the other side.
And return the cauterize; and now there are four cauterizes.
And if you see, cauterize with a cauterize having three vertiments.
And you cure the cauterize more than it has remained to get bruised by troops' days, because it is more confident that the other causes precede in the cure.
Chapter.XXXI.
Of the cauterization of hydrops.
Cauterize not catch in hydrops but properly in three.
When you cure the hydrops with the ways of cure which I have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then return that it cauterizes with four cauterizes in the circuit of the womb and one cauterize on the stomach, and another cauterize on the baby, and another cauterize on the melts, and two cauterizes between the ribs of the two, and a cauterize in the right of the foot, and another cauterize on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterize is proppendan to the spicity of the cord.
And return the cauterize uppermost that you get bruised for a long time.
And you do not evacuate the malady of cure appropriately that they are added to the two intentions, and the other returns to it with the help of healing.
The form of the cauterize with which it is cauterized the stomach is keyhole according to the form of that preceding, and it is that with which is cauterized the two is olive according to which is preceding its form.
Chapter.XXXII.
Of the cauterization of the feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are apostemated in hydrops and are filled with watery urine, return that you cauterize the feet on the two of the foot with a keyhole shape according to which is preceding its form, and raise your hand with the cauterize, and do not twist that; and return to raise your hand, and do not return it all, because the watery urine returns.
It is the cauterize according to this form: And return it on the two thighs with two cauterizes, and in each thigh be made cauterize at the end of the cauterize knife. And be the cauterize according to the length of the thigh: and leave it down and the other is lower on your place in the thigh; and over each thigh, two cauterizes.
And return the plague uppermost that it gets cured for a long time that some urine returns from it.
And you cure them by those causes which I have said.
Chapter.XXXIII.
Of the cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is parched and moistened by felling and retentive fluids, it is the digestive and retenitive virtue which are in the belly and the intestines, and it is cured with the ways of cure which I have said, and do not confer your cure, and sometimes the malady suffers cauterize of the exhibiting virtue, then cauterize that with a great cauterize on its two stomach according to which has preceded in the cauterization of the belly, with a cauterize of the circle and with four cauterizes in the circuit of the delicate entrails, with a cauterize keyhole; and a cauterize about the neck with a great one, or with two cauterizes.
And if sometimes the exuberant fluids are suffered by the malady of the water, then cauterize that on the penticle and on the intestines, and fort hold fast adjusting two cauterizes on the stomach and close to the inguinas, because it is a perfect cure for the health of which there is no need.
Chapter.XXXIV.
Of the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When so in the nature remains ancient hemorrhoids or a humor of gross felling or corrupt fluids, they are cured with the water which I have said in the division and do not confer your own cure, then return that it cauterizes with three cauterizes on the two sponds of the two little and triangular, and one cauterize over the navel is cut by the two.
And if you accept that the belly of the patient is parched and his food is not dried up, and that his face is sometimes apostemated, then return that it cauterizes on the belly with a great cauterize according to which has preceded; and a cauterize on the baby, and another cauterize on the melts of the patient with a cauterize keyhole, and leave the cauterize for some time uppermost, then cure its inside which is sana.
Chapter.XXXV.
Of the cauterization of ateyl by separation from each other.
When you separate ateyl, then your hand ignites the cauterize which is gathered with fire. And return that it ignites in that ateyl which is separated, and the last hand within which enters the cauterize at the opening of the vein from which comes the blood.
And make one time or two times, because if the ateyl is troops, then cauterize each of them according to which I have said, and return to cure those with the water which you have given them within their openings so that they are sana.
And if you cauterize with a great cauterize on the neck, it is more likely to cause death.
Chapter.XXXVI.
Of the cauterization of fistulas which are caused in nature by the separation of the two.
When Nature does not obey to the work which I have said in its place, and the patient is frightened by the water, he is healed with a cauterize.
Then when someone has a fistula in the nature behind and it is ancient, I extract from it the corrupted humors and then what must be put there that it becomes covered, which can be done with a subtle attempt, and the quantity of its depth is then placed to match the mentioned attempted.
Then bring the cautery that resembles a ray. And then set this cautery on fire in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it intrudes into the attempt.
And repeat on that cautery inside which are burned those corrupted humors once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the hernia, then beware of all these places; and do not pass there unless the fistula is in a muscular location and you think it does not penetrate.
Then cure that area so that it is healed.
And if the location is sealed and there are no matter left from it, and so remain for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely cured.
And if those matters are not left from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or into the prostate of it or flowing out from those causes from which there will be a memory in its location.
Chapter.
Of the cauterization of the sores.
When in the sores there is pain from cold or from strong wind, and because of this the patient's legs are stiff, then when you cauterize that which is above the sores, cauterize each sore with a pointed cautery from which the memory will recur.
And then firmly cauterize it with a small piece of cautery so that three little scars will be left, and then they heal behind in a hurry.
Chapter.
Of the cauterization of the bladder.
When it happens in the bladder that it becomes soft and moist through cold and moisture, so that the patient' water does not hold, then cauterize that at the top of three small pieces of cautery on the bladder, where the hair of the penis begins, and cauterize with one cautery in the right part, and another in the left.
And be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the hair of the penis; and cauterize that with a cautery at the top of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And be a pointed cautery according to how it has progressed.
Chapter.
Of the cauterization of the hernia.
When there is cold and moisture in the hernia, and because of this the pregnancy becomes prevented, and the menstrual blood of it is corrupted, and the beginning of its causing pain is delayed, then when that location is cauterized with three cauteries in the circle of the navel, as I have said above in the cauterization of the bladder; and a cautery at the top of the two, or two cauteries, and be a pointed cautery.
Chapter.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle joint.
When moist secretions are infiltrated in the joint of the ankle, and the pain is caused by the movement of its location, and it is indicated that the cushion is prolonged on the other when compared to it. And the location of the dislocation is atrophied in it which it does not bend.
Then when you cauterize the patient' ankle from above with a cautery that resembles a ring, so that you have a subtle attempt in the circle of that location as it is rolled over, and so that that location falls on its own place of the circle.
And be the cautery from which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize it with three cauteries that resemble olives.
And be made according to the quantity of the bitterness of all the cord; and then cure that location so that it is healed.
Chapter.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When there is pain in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, so that the patient' legs are stiff with water, then when you do not have the medicine that I have said, and that water is ancient, then when you lack the medicine of humors that are gross, either with spoiled pills or artificial ones or that resemble them; then cauterize that.
And the way of the cautery in that place is according to two ways: or cauterize with burning medicines, or cauterize with fire.
Then according to two proven ways, of which one is to cauterize that at the top of the foot with three triangular cauteries according to this shape; and make them with good depth. And be the space between each cautery, which is the quantity of the bitterness of that which I have said; and if the cautery is small or large.
Some few steps are made on this: a cautery over the middle of the foot on the top part for four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a ring that resembles the circle in which the dislocation of the ankle joint is caused; and the ring should be continuous, and its bitterness should be of all the cord.
And this is the way to cauterize in cytiquism when pain adheres to the ankle and it does not extend within the cushion.
But if it extends within the cushion, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the cushion over the location at which the pain occurs; and one cautery on the top of the foot for four times a little is necessary in the part that is flexible.
And if the cautery is small, and be the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the bitterness of all the cord.
And if the patient' leg bends that pain extends to the foot, then cauterize that where it bends with three or four or more points if you need them.
And if the patient' leg bends that pain is on the side of the foot near the heel, then cauterize that where it bends with a small cautery.
And beware in any cauterization that you do not finish with fire; and this can cause great pain to the nerves or sever damage, and because of this, it is on the patient' leg like an unclean thing or a contracture.
You have already seen one of those which I cauterized on the big toe and finished it off with fire in the cauterization, and the bed was burned until the finger; and fire penetrated through all the foot. Then soon there came a strong solution for the stomach, and then death.
And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this way.
And the wise said in the cauterization of the ankle, from which this way is: make it resemble a ring of iron, whose circle is most of a palm; and it should be according to its size, a little less than a date nut or more than a date nut.
And within that ring there is another third part; and be the length of those hairs according to the quantity of the hair of the penis; and let them be divided into two parts with rings of iron; and this is the way of it:
Then let it be ignited in the fire within which it becomes red and makes sparks; then let it be placed on the top of the ankle, and let the patient' leg bend over his thigh. And therefore cauterize that with three rounded cauterizations on a plate.
And let it rest for three days; and let the plaster be applied to the wound and let the wound be left open for seven days; and then let the plague be cured by itself.
Saying of Al-Bukhari: O son, with regard to this species of cauterization we have little experience because we fear its regard and for that reason we have found few who look at it.
May there be fewer cauterizations on him who has suffered them, and may he turn away from him who looks at him!
May there be fewer medicinal cauterizations that you make two circles with a sharp tool that would pass through the door of iron; its length is equal to the width of its surface, which are two nuts or keys.
And if the space between each is equal to the quantity of its thickness; and are open above and below, and are so arranged that they contain themselves according to this form:
And place your hand over the patient's ankle joint while he sits on his side; and press your thumb onto the top of the ankle; and take a little tail of water between two circles, and its quality is that it should be with a small fire little by little, and let it go for an hour, and endure the pain of the patient and the burning of him -- as he does with fire -- until the pain stops.
And then lift your hand up from the instrument and wash the tail of water from all the ankle with two-handed water.
And let it rest for three days and place the plaster on him until the burning becomes more severe, and let it go for several days, and run after him with a sharp tool; this is the last resort.
And therefore cauterize that with three rounded cauterizations on a plate.
And if the pain is widespread within the space or the leg, make the statue with him that contains water according to what was done in the ankle joint.
And this is the way of water tail, and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take of alkali and of the non-dissolving half of two, and cut it in half and place it on a new wave from which the halves are pierced with a small hole according to the quantity that enters him.
And place the source of the other wave on top of that alkali and of the non-dissolving half of two, and press those with your hand by good compression, and let the wave that sends away him of sharp water in the halves go to the wave covered.
And then adjust all that water, and put it on another lively half of alkali, because that one is also sharpened by a strong force, which is administered in small doses of medicine and cauterization of the other members, because operation does fire.
And then, from some medicines there are that are cauterized thickly, as well as to be made to go out and to bring back to what is made to go out and to return again, and they are mixed.
And Gualia told me about a man from the people of Al-Andalus with his operation and treatment that healed the pain of his ankle and sciatica, and he was very pleased with it, saying: "There is no need for any other treatment, and because it is healed within one day as well as with massage, for now I know this [method]."
And it should be taken from a clear vine, and if it is not cleared, take it from the fig tree that is recent; and let it be trissada with a little bit of salt and be placed on the ankle in which the pain is, or in the crotch, or in the leg, and be looked at.
And let it rest for the quantity of three hours, or the quantity that the patient tolerates a burning sensation.
And then put him in the bath and when his body is heated up, bring him into the sun because the pain stops and he is healed.
You should know that there is no need to add something to these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
May Al-Asorides has said that when the vein is tightened by a goat's skin, it should be washed with old oil, and placed between the feet of the leg and between the fossils.
And then take dried goat' s skin and inflame that with fire within it is made of carbon; and then place him over the wool and let it rest until it is dried up. And then repeat that water, and do not stop until the water is heated within the ankle and the pain stops.
This method of cauterization is called cauterization by goats.
Chapter LXXII.
Of Pain's Cauterization.
Some pains are in two ways because of two causes, namely because of a change of place or a wound or excessive evacuation, and because of the similarity of those to what happens because of the application of a rubbing substance or a wet one.
There is only one kind of cauterization that is made by the application of a rubbing substance.
Then there is only one way of evacuating the patient with pills that are similar to each other, which are made on both sides of the line according to the location of the pain, because there are three lines in which cauterizations are applied, or more, according to the quantity that comes out from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the substance.
Then it should be done cauterization by means of a point.
And if you want, do cauterization with three cauterizations or four as follows:
Chapter LXII.
Of Cauterization at the Beginning of Gilbosity.
Some pain is common in small children; and the beginning of it can be seen in children by a change in their appearance, by the elevation of their temperature, and by the movement that happens in them.
It is felt in the last spine of the back and in the bones that are already beginning to rise above the others.
And when you see water and want to prevent it, then cauterize that with a circle according to this form: that takes the cauterization on all sides of the spine joint.
And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the spine with a point-type cauterization. The points should be placed among them.
And then let it heal the place with water that we have said.
May there be guard that cauterization is not administered in a condition of a spasm of nerves.
Chapter LXIV.
Of Cauterization for Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is because this is what is called gout properly.
And then when the gout of a frothing cause is cured by a certain way of treatment and the pains are not increased, then the burning must be cauterized.
And it is that you cauterize that with an evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the leg with a few cauterizations.
It should be made by means of olive oil, and this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains radiate inside the ankles or other joints, and when there are swelling of the toes it is necessary to make them smaller, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauterizations altogether with this cautery.
And if you need to make many cauterizations that these cauterizations are necessary for him, then cauterize it and don't press too much with your hand before cauterization, being just the surface of the foot.
And if the pains radiate inside the toe and the two ankles, then administer the cauterization that we have already said in the previous chapter.
And if the pains occur only there, and it is called diabetes, then make points on the line of fire as it revolves, making points on these two lines.
And if there are still pains in the toes, then make points on the line of fire on each toe and on the nail of the hand.
And if the pains radiate towards the sides in the thighs or the muscles, then cauterize all of them on both sides.
And don't evacuate the patient if he doesn't have good regime and reception of medicines, because if it is done well and the fire is extinguished with this cauterization, God helps it.
Chapter. XLV.
Of cauterization for breaks.
When there is a break in the ankles and saying to the patient that he will have his meal later, and he uses soothing means so that the wound of his belly does not hurt.
Then follow the patient between your two legs, and order him to keep his genitals within so that the hernia appears or the intestine comes out.
Then return it to the toes and hide the break on the bones of the penis with a ring that looks similar to a half-circle of the ribs that are separated.
Then light the cauterization in this way:
within so that it is a small fire and it makes sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient’s thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant is on their legs, and another is on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cauterization on that mark with your hand, facing down, and put it in so that you can see the bones of the penis in the middle; and repeat it for the other side if you don't get it right the first time by seeing them in the middle.
Observe with care the movement of the intestine during the time of your cauterization, so that you don't burn it and cause death or other great evil to the patient.
And you should know that if you don't have the bone, you don't operate.
And the cauterization of children must be done with care, according to their age and size.
Then clean the place where the cauterization was made for three days, so that it doesn't get infected.
And you should take care of those with other injuries, so they are healed.
And the patient should lie on his back for ten days, so that the wound and the plague are sealed.
And you should not give him food according to the length of his recovery time; the intestine must not burn if it doesn' t need effort to heal.
And when he is ready to be taken away after ten days, then administer him a good diet, and keep him for another forty days.
And it should be well-organized work and well-filled with food and drink; and it should be very serious, because when one follows this complete regime of healing, it is cured.
And I will tell you about the healing of other breaks in the belly, and begin with it, and don' t stop, then cauterize that break with a third cauterization according to its quantity; and if there is another break, clean it with water, and if it isn' t cured.
And already some said that the first break should be cauterized with a triangular cauterization according to this form, because it is marked like this:
And the line that goes down from the top to the bottom of the break, and another line on top of it; and place your hand with a ring-shaped cauterization on top of it, first because it is easier and better.
Chapter. XLV.
Of cauterization for twists.
When there is pain in the arms or legs due to a fall or blow, and that pain persists for a long time, and you don' t give him medication; then cauterize it with a pointed cauterization.
And the cauterization of each member according to its size and age, and the effort and danger of it; and the location of the twist and pain.
So if he is cured after the first cauterization, it is good; otherwise, repeat it; because usually those pains are due to a twist in the member that touches the patient's body, so you should cauterize it to heal him.
Chapter. XLVii.
Of cauterization for leprosy.
With a great deal of care if it is leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of fire and melancholy.
Then consider if the leprosy is caused by putrefaction of fire and sadness; and if you want to cauterize it, think whether it is cured with water that we have said in the division and don' t forget, nor be afraid about the patient that corruption embraces all his body and all his composition, then cauterize it on the top of the head at the middle place of the scalp, and on the second one away from it, facing the back of the hair; and both on two sides; and behind, on the neck or servitz.
And finally your hand with a little ring of cauterization that is kept in the bone and leaves it moved; so that the exhalation of thick vapors is cleared from it; and cauterize it on itself according to what is necessary.
And if leprosy is already spread on the patient and clearly manifest, then consider that you cauterize it with those cauterizations that we have said in the head; and on the tip of the nose, and two on each ear, and two on the two sides of the neck, and one behind, near the chin, and another over it, and two on the shoulders, and one on each shoulder, and two on the two thighs, and one on each thigh, and two on the two knees, and one on each knee, and two on the two ankles, and one on each foot; and finally, remember to cauterize all these places.
And keep away from those nerves that are under the skull; do not burn them.
With some cauterizations it is done on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another over the fist.
And know that the more you apply cautery, the greater healing and benefit there will be; and know that the patient has no pain in cauterization, just as they have it with surgery, since the body is already numb.
And where the cauterization is great or small according to the limbs and joints according to what precedes the instruments.
Then take care in applying cautery with charred cow dung mixed with mel and the other cure within so that it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
Of Cauterization in Stupor.
When any member is stiff or asleep and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then cauterize that stiff member according to the size of the member or the age.
And this small cauterization enters into the essence of the bond a little. Then take care in that one with vinegar within so that it is healed.
And some veins are cauterized when the body is cold, which affects the main and foot, and the spinal cord of the two and four limbs, and the nerves that move that member, and it is healed.
More should not be applied to this except for one who knows the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the whole body moving.
Chapter.xlix.
Of Cauterization in Scars that are Morphus.
When scars are old and do not respond to any of the medicine enema, then cauterize that one with a small cauterization according to the essence of the bond within so that the whiteness and color of it is changed, and the color of it is altered.
Then take care in applying to that one with charred cow dung and lentils, with roselight oil and arnavosa leaves, and holy water or St. John's wort, all mixed together, and bind it with a cloth and place it on the area within so that it is healed.
Chapter.l.
Of Cauterization in Crankiness.
When the cancer has begun and you want to remove that star, then cauterize it with a circular cauterization in the path of its rotation.
The wise said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in its own place; but I have not seen this, for I think that it is ulcerated, and I have already seen it a few times.
And it is said to be applied in the path of its rotation with a circular cauterization as mentioned above, or with a dot of cauterization.
Chapter.li.
Of Cauterization in Adultery.
When an adultery is delayed in maturity, and it becomes late due to the age of the patient, or old age, which causes decay and deficiency, and you want to hasten its maturity; then cauterize it with a small dot of cauterization in the path of its rotation, leaving it unhealed; for it will quickly mature.
But if you want to pierce it with cauterization, then take this cauterization form and place it on the patient' s own place within so that it enters into the bond.
And if the cauterization is placed in that location that has been left behind, so that the arms may be relieved; then take care in applying to it within so that it is healed.
Chapter.lii.
Of Cauterization in Corrosion.
Corrodent is ambulatory corruption in the limb, which corrodes that one as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Therefore, if that corrosion occurs in a location where it suffers from fire cauterization, then take small, sharp, pointed cauterization tools and apply them to that location where corrosion occurs, and apply large cauterization according to what is appropriate in that location where the corrosion occurs.
Then cauterize all of it within so that you eradicate all corrosion and do not affect any other cause.
Then leave it unhealed for three days, and apply a mixture of oil and vinegar to the cauterized areas within so that all scars are completely eradicated and all corrosion is gone.
Then take care in applying to that one with a meat-producing enema.
But if, after three days of applying the meat-producing enema and it is not corrupted, then apply again to this one where it is rotten in the locations that are corrupted;
Corrosion is cured by some means with acute medicine, for that one is half of cauterization in place. But cauterization with fire is more beneficial.
The healing of it with acute medicine in the division, and then take this one when you are going to sleep.
Chapter.liiii.
Of Cauterization in Claws and of the Others.
There are claws that come out at the back of the leg, and this is a gross cause, exit, which bites the leg; and it is cauterized in two ways: with fire cauterization and water tail cauterization.
But fire cauterization is that you ignite the cauterization with the appearance of a butterfly fluttering about, which is made of iron according to its quantity that contains the claw completely, and it is made of delicate edges.
Then place the ignited cauterization on the claw, and turn it over with the cauterization in its path within so that the cauterization reaches the depth of the claw. Leave it unhealed for three days within so that it begins to burn the arm. Then apply this one with dried rose leaves crushed with salt, and leave the application on it for a moment, for that one will eradicate its roots.
Then take care in applying to the location with a meat-producing enema within so that it is healed.
And if it is not converted, and small spots occur on the surface of the body, especially in the feet, then when you apply cauterization with water tail, and that one takes a little piece of wax or iron or a butterfly's wing, and places it on the claw; and when you press your hand, turn it over with the application of a small amount of water tail, and reapply the pressure of your hand, and make sure the tail of water passes through the root of the claw; and wait for the patient for a little while for the biting of the water tail according to the hour, and then take off the application, for the claw will be cured with its roots.
And so it was applied to this one that it is the other within so that you pass over all of them in the body.
Then take care in applying to those bumps that the roots of the claws are eradicated with meat-producing enemas, through which the animal gets its food.
Chapter.liiii.
Of Cauterization in Tremors.
When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or fever from rubbing, or a similar cause, then take care when you apply cauterization to this one with four cauterizations or two over the spines of the two limbs, between each spine with one cauterization; and on the feet of the patient, and on the abdomen, with an olive cauterization.
And the tremors of the patient cease, and the healing of the feverous body quickens.
Chapter.lv.
Of Cauterization in Accidental Injuries to the Body.
When the body is accidentally injured and it forms pustules that are produced from gross corruption; then at the beginning, when it appears, it should be cauterized completely on the top of the fistula with delicate edges cauterization, and the extremities of it are extended with fire; or with a long edge cauterization; or with a lenticular cauterization.
And some are cauterized by burning at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not burned, but the superfluity is broken up and cured from that.
But it must be noted that this is not done by the use of the blade of a scalpel.
Chapter VI.
Of cauterization of blood flowing from an injury with an arc.
Of the treatment of blood flowing from an injury caused by a blade, which often leads to gangrene, or the incision of abscesses or the cauterization of a member, and then it is difficult to heal.
Therefore, when you have applied the cauterizer to the member, place your hand over the orifice of the blade, and pause it over that place so that the blood does not flow out from under your hand, and do not let it escape.
Then put on the fire a few and large hot coals, for many reasons, and exhale them over those places where they are to be heated.
Then take from them a small or a large one according to the place and pulse where the artery is broken, with rapidity before the blood has stopped flowing completely, and cauterize that place as soon as possible after closing it.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery while you are holding the cauterizer and exhaling it, then take another one carefully prepared on the fire, and then do not stop applying it to another place where the blood has been stopped.
And you must take care not to burn the nerve here, and that other evil does not come upon the patient.
And you must know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it by constricting the place, and more so when the artery is large, unless in one of four ways: or if you cauterize it as described above, or if you extract it when it should not be extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of the member are burned and the blood is stopped, or that it is tied with a bandage or twisted by a strong strap, or that it is placed on medicine whose virtue is to stop the blood; and they are strangled by pulleys.
But that which administrates a severe constriction of the member and a strong strap by position or for other reasons does not succeed except in some cases.
But if this is applied to some place that does not have the medicine present, or that does not need it, then open the pause of the said indication on the orifice of that vein as described above, and understand a severe constriction of the member where the pulse stops from its normal movement, and over the blade do not allow it to be re-moved; and over the blade sprinkle cold water of a great coolness as long as the blood congeals and thickens; and also burn the place where cauterization or medicine is needed.
Of incision and piercing, of blisters and of fluid extraction, of gangrene and of its appearances.
We have already said in the first chapter all diseases in which cauterization by fire and medicine is appropriate, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments with which the cauterization should be done; and we will now arrange the chapters of the second part according to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that way, so that what is desired may be found, then over that that the seeker has demanded.
And before I begin with you, know, remember, and learn that which in this chapter is for the sake of fear for you who are seeking; for it is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And for you who are seeking, know that which must be done with great care, for in the operation described in this chapter many things can be expelled from an injury, or cut off, or burned, or drained, or made to pass by a leech; and similar procedures. And of all these fear and horror accompanies them, and in the worst case, death awaits them.
And I warn you that in this place do not fall what is dangerous, for some of the things that happen to you are caused by the bad ways of men who have fallen ill. And of them is some who, by their illness, go astray and often die, and because of the urgency of their illness, and because of the long duration of their illness, and because of the fear with which one dies when one suffers from it.
And those are the ones who give you hope and comfort you, but their illness is pernicious.
And it is not that you should consent to such a way of doing things with you as this; and your caution should be greater than your haste, and your rapidity; and do not presume any reason about it except by certain knowledge which certifies it for you, and to which the glorious succession of praise belongs.
And use in the treatment of all your illnesses by prescription and indication of that which is beneficial for you, because it is in that way that you are helped in gaining fame and memory, glory and honor.
Or children, God in you inspirers the understanding and does not withdraw from you guidance and protection, for it is in His hand.
And I have arranged this chapter by chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of treatment of the head within the feet, so that what you are seeking may be found with you who are seeking and from which you needed it.
Chapter One.
Of the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
And you must know that this illness which appears in children is caused by the birth, and when the body of the child becomes light-headed.
And some are caused by a hidden cause which is not understood.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and all those whom I saw had died, and for that reason I considered it to be a great work in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head remained the same size for it could not support itself because of the great size of its head, and more than the moisture increased within it until fire killed it.
And this moisture is added between the cheek and the skull, or it is added behind the skull, or it is added above the skull.
For the operation in that case, if the moisture is between the cheek and the skull and the abscess is small, then you should cut into the middle of the head in length, and make two holes where the moisture runs, and this is the shape of the sponge:
And if the moisture increases more and the abscess grows larger, then there are two splits according to this way:
And if the moisture is behind the skull, it is a sign that you open the combs of the head completely and press the water out when you wrap them with your hand on the inside, and do not let it escape to you who are seeking. Then you should cut into the middle of the head according to this way:
And then take out all the moisture by cutting it; and make the splits wide with strips and feathers; and then tie it up, and cure the pulse with hot water on the fifth day, and then clean the member and treat it with dry food of little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
Here is the translation of the text:
And watch that you do not incise the artery, and take care that the blood flows from the patient as a result of this escape of blood through the opening, for this flow of blood causes pain and makes the patient faint.
Chapter second.
When this catarrh or fever is in the feet or legs, and it has been long standing; then, if you have not already used medicine on it, use this second cure by making an incision in those two arteries.
And therefore cover up when you want to make an incision in the head of the patient, and rub the area with a harsh cloth to prevent hair from getting in the way; also strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the veins pulsate; and the places near the ears are separated from each other by certain parts in some men.
And place your hand on the artery to feel for the pulse; and make an incision in each with a sharp tool, entering into the bone, and let it run according to the shape of the head.
And if you wish, insert your hand between the artery and the skin, and separate the two at the incisions made in each part.
And the length of the incision should be twice the distance between two fingers, because when a vein is incised, the pulse will beat twice as fast, and this can cause fainting.
Except if the artery cannot be felt, then cover up because you will need to measure the distance from the ear to three fingers' width, and then feel for the pulse, and enter into the bone.
And let go of the pulse, and let the amount of blood be measured in a vessel. And hold the patient's leg firmly while measuring, for this amount of blood is second to that which appears from the virtue of the patient and the expansion of the artery.
And therefore consider the possibility of gangrene; and if there is any cause of swelling in the bone, then incise it so that it does not cause apoplexy.
And therefore strengthen the pulse with plums and linen cloth; and protect that with oil, and cure it within by applying ointment until it is healed.
Chapter.iii.
Of the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When this emigranea (old age) or fever occurs suddenly, with the use of herbal remedies and due to the quality of the air in the temples, or if it is violent and similar to those mentioned above, then we will address ourselves to the treatment of these malignant diseases by extracting the arteries in the temples, or by cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the way of performing the operation and extracting them is that the patient shaves the hair in the temples where it appears; also consider the artery that is pulsating there, for it is hidden except by its pulse. It is only seen in a few men due to its velocity.
And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the liquid with cold water until the artery appears clearly to you. Then take this grip, which is the shape of this: And then take the thread with ease until you reach the artery; and let go of it at the roots; and cut off that part of the thread that is between the two roots; also discover those threads that are on the outside, all of them.
Except if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a thread at its extreme end; and make an incision in that one according to the shape of the leg, which should be longer than shorter, and there will not be a flow of blood because it would not be incised if it were not long.
And then let go of the pulse of half a vessel. To two or three.
And if the artery is thick, then cover it with two threads of linen or rope, strong and long, and do not allow any putrefaction in front of the consolidation of the pulse, and let there be a flow of blood.
And then make an incision between two linen threads; and cut it at that time or another.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a sharp instrument within the bone until the extremities are incised, and set this work in order.
It is better work than the patient has fever or a cold; for cauterization helps those causes that assist in the ending of the humors, so it is better to do it quickly.
And then extract the arteries that you have shaven at the base of the head, and place them on a clean cloth; and let them rest for a moment, and cure them with dry medicines to prevent the flesh from rotting, and let it run according to the shape of the legs until it is healed.
And if while you operate on another part of the body there is a flow of blood from the artery, then let it stop bleeding by strengthening your hand within that area; and stop it with cauterization or with something else that stops the blood. And if any of those causes are not present, then pause the thread over the area until the pulse stops bleeding; and tie it with a knot, and wet that place with very cold water until the pulse quiets down, and strengthen it according to what you have.
And the best way to extract an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives; and pause each one, lit a fire, and let it run until it reaches the bone, and make an incision between the two roots, so that it runs along with those two threads, for they are not consolidated by this cauterization.
This is the form of the cautery:
The acute points of both knives. However, if the points of both knives are not acute, then use sharp ones that are suitable for each one; and do not cut the flesh with too much speed.
Then, if there is any thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held back in them, and the flesh is cut off easily.
This work is better than all works, and it is easier.
The distance between the two knives should be the quantity of the thickness of the thread.
Chapter fourth.
Of the cure for sore eyes from acrid tears.
When it is because of acrid tears, and those veins are above the forehead that cause this problem, and do not apply medicine to it; and often the face of the patient becomes red, and feels as if it were burning from the acridity of the tears; also, the eyelids are scratched by their sharpness, and the skin is burned by the acrimony of the tears; therefore, use this operation for them, and let them rest for a moment.
And so you order the patient to rub his skin with a leather glove, and insert three slits evenly spaced according to the length of his forehead. And if the length of the slit falls two times: the first slit be evenly spaced to the length of the nose in the middle location of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little movement of the eyelids that are on the eyelid, and the third from the other side.
And be careful about the incisions of the wounds that are in two pieces, and extend your hand from the continuation of both the jaws. And if the space between each incision is three times adjusted.
And if you have a sponge of the dry or rags to remove the sweat from the wound.
Then place the sponge with two sharp extremities, whose this form is the shape of the incision: to go to the second incision. Then remove all the tissue that is between two incisions in the middle of the bone and insert it into the second incision. Then place this sponge and insert it into the first incision again with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
Then pause the skin of him on the edge of the wound attached to the tissue, and the edges of him away from the bone, and insert it into that which reaches the middle slit, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the arms.
Then be continued the incision as long as the tissue allows, and insert it into that which reaches the middle slit before the other one.
And then pour from the wound a little quantity of water, squeeze the feet of the wound.
Then place in each slit a little piece of twine, and place on these dusts impregnated with wine and oil and vinegar and let it not develop pus.
And on the third day let him remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of lukewarm water, and then clean it with basilic oil with rose water and other things so that the blisters are healed.
Capitol
Of the cure of blisters by means of cats and to the arms descending from the parts inside of the head.
When in addition to the cats hot and continuous, and often the arms of the patient exhausted little, and now the care for their healing, and their eyelids ulcerated and of their eyes the skin, and in the forehead sharp pain when they rub it and the sudden withdrawal of the blood, then know that these accidents do not proceed except from small veins that come out of the inside parts.
And the best cure in these is this: that you order the patient to rub his forehead, and insert three slits in the middle location (and begin with the incision of the left temple within the right temple; and be a cut through the bone; and extend your hand from the eyelids that are hot due to mastication), until it is exposed.
Dry all the wound with a sponge or rags and then insert between the two edges of the slit a piece of twine or a rag dry. Then remove it carefully from these dusts impregnated with wine and oil so that it does not develop pus.
And when you remove the water and see that the pus has already diminished, then know that it is necessary to prepare a paste from two parts of flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and let it be made into a plaster and applied to these blisters to the naked flesh.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.
Of the cure of water that cats in the ears.
All causes that cats in the ears are of four species, that is either mineral and similar to mineral, namely iron and lead, or plant and similar to plant, namely thistle and favus, or fluid and similar to fluid, namely water and vinegar, and their similar things, or some animal.
And so when mineral cats in the ear or any other cause similar to these causes that do not fit and you doubt about the ear, then place the ear on the shoulder, and if the cat persists, then distill in that cause of olive oil or vinegar, and then administer its extract, and make it sneeze with a condiment, and follow it with a warm napkin. Then place on the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the sides, for the motas seen is froghous with these causes.
And if it is not froghous, then administer an extract of him with the instrument called a gentle tweezers, whose this form is:
And if it is froghous with the tweezers, it is good; otherwise, administer the extract of him with a little amount of double-boiled oil.
And so if it is not froghous with water, then make a tube of aram and insert the end of the tube in the opening of the ear and close it around the tube with wax and soft oil so that it is not open but the tube. Then extract it with a strong pull, for ten seen are froghous with water that we have told.
Then if it is not froghous in this way, then take a piece of string or twine or a piece of cloth and wrap it around the ear gently. Then insert it into the opening of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear from its moisture.
And so if it is not froghous with all the causes that we have told, then you cut off what prevents it from developing pus or spasms.
And the way of cutting that off is to sanctify the patient of the vein of the head and extract it from the third time according to the virtue of him, and then place it on its sides, and open the ear with a little slit in the middle of the ear, and turn the ear around. Then let the slit be of lunar form that reaches the pus, and if the pus is stuck, remove it with an appropriate instrument; then sew the slit in that hour with speed, and cure it within.
And if the cause that cats in the ear is one of the greases that they grow and it is inflated, then administer the cure and extract it; but if it does not respond to you by sneezing, then take a sponge of twine slightly according to this form: And administer to it the removal of that grease that is caught in the ear.
And do not let it fall water when you think that it is already moistened by the ear vapor, and then remove it with pieces of cloth or a gentle tweezers, or extract it in this way: for it is relieved by removing it.
Then in the ear water that enters into the ear, be aware that the patient uses sneezing with a condiment at the beginning, and fill his ear with a little cloth, and if it is not froghous by this water, it is good; otherwise, take two small peals and double-boil them, and make those peals hard, and when they are hard, place one of them in the opening of the ear and make it jump from the other side with a little peal. Then do not stop until all the water has been drained.
Then do not stop until all the water has been drained. And as soon as the water has been drained, take paper or a cloth, i.e., place one end of it in his ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it burns.
And then put the other cloth and make as many holes as needed until all the water has been drained, and then place it over the area where the pain is.
If the pain is in the ear due to a small object, then insert and remove it quickly; however, if it is caused by something of greater size that has lodged within the ear canal, administer the treatment with force and precision, and this pain is less severe than all the other causes that can cause pain in the ear.
If the pain is due to an earworm, and you have not yet explained the treatment mentioned in the previous section, then when treating it, make sure to keep the ear away from sunlight.
And if there is any cause of earworms, then extract it with force or precision; however, if no cause appears, take a thin tube-like object and remove the wax with it: And then insert the thin end into the ear according to the amount of wax it suffers; and then suck strongly with a firm hand, and make drops of water appear; until all the worms have been expelled.
However, if you do not obey the instruction to wait, then you will have to try again; repeat the treatment with wax as mentioned above; and then refer to the treatment of worms in the ear from the distillation section.
And be it your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, whose shape is as follows: make it thin, and have a small hole at one end, and place it on the ear.
And so that it fits nicely into the cavity of the canal where it is necessary to insert. And if you wish, take a string and wrap it nicely around the end; and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear - or, in this case, the ear - and insert the string into it, and grasp your hand firmly over it to prevent the oil from flowing out; and then place the string into the ear canal, and with a gentle press, let the oil flow into the cavity and relieve the earache.
And if it is already partially inserted into the ear, burn it slightly with fire. Be careful that the cause you are distilling in the ear is not too sensitive, because ear medicine does not tolerate heat well.
Chapter VII.
Of treatment of earache.
Some small holes in the ears of some older people do not perforate, and this happens sometimes in men due to illness or flesh wound; and this earache is caused by a plug in the ear canal, which does not allow for movement of the eardrum, and in some cases it is at the outer edge.
That which occurs at the edge does not allow for movement of the eardrum and is in difficult conditions to heal.
And in that ear in which you can move the eardrum, be careful not to touch the ear of the patient towards the sun and look into it. And if there is a blockage that appears, open it with a small instrument, whose shape is as follows:
If the end of the instrument is small in width, whose one edge is sharp and the other not; and the blade is made up of two thin edges so that it does not hurt the ear.
And if the blockage is by hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat, then extract it with a very thin blade, and cut it with a swift and easy motion so that all the hidden flesh is removed.
And if the blockage is at the edge of the ear, take a thin blade and burn it slightly with fire; then place it into the ear canal.
And if you feel that the earache is caused by a blockage that can be removed easily, do so with ease; and be careful not to irritate the nerves of the ear.
And then place a cloth of the second kind over the ear, according to the amount of width the string you wrapped has; and make drops of water appear over the ear for several days in a row; or take some, sprinkle it on the affected part, and use oil; and if there is an earache, then apply the oil to help relieve it. And if the ear is already swollen, be careful not to disturb the wound.
However, if there is bleeding due to the earache, then dip a sponge or cloth in water and place it on the ear; and administer the treatment that stops the bleeding, which is described in the distillation section.
Chapter VIII.
Of treatment of earache with an ointment.
These are the causes of earache with an ointment. Some are wet, and some are dry.
And if you have those that cause earache with an ointment, and cut them into small pieces; then place them onto the affected parts.
If there is bleeding due to earache, then you must cauterize those with a small sharp knife.
The best cauterization is to cut those very small and, when all the causes of their razor-like edges are gone, they will not return and will be burned without returning.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for large earaches that occur in the eyelids of men.
Some small objects become stuck to the eyelids of men, which is built up and becomes stronger and tougher; and the larger it grows, the more difficult it is to remove.
It is accumulation of thick moisture on the lower eyelid and then on the upper eyelid.
The operation is that you should consider if the larger object is attached to it, whether it appears from the eyelid and is removed completely; and the cause of it is avoided.
Then break that open with a small instrument, and cut it into small pieces with ease; then hang those pieces from a string, and let them dangle freely.
If the wound is large, then join it with a suture; and heal that wound.
If it is small, do not worry about it for that wound will heal on its own, and the blood will bring healing.
If the larger one is falling towards the inner edge of the eyelid, then open the eyelid and hang it from a string, and let it dangle freely; otherwise, you will not find any cause.
Then clean that hand with salt water; and heal the wound with oil within it, so that it heals well.
Chapter X.
From the cure of the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnah is grays the qual is engendrat in the tunics of the eyelid above, and most often in children, it aggravates the eyes and causes their catarrh; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears gather there.
And so you can keep them on their faces all the time, and they sleep on their faces; and their eyebrows are already wet with inflammation, and there is an increase in the appearance of pimples on them; and when you press the area, you feel the swelling inside them.
And another manner of operation is in those who the patient keeps their head on their chest, and they place a drape over them and a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all sides, and they place that over this one and press the fingers in saying "toes" so that it is added arcernac into the center of the circle, and then put in the center of this humidity with a spatula entering through the width, and the width does not exceed the width which is made by flapotomy.
May also in the preon cover that you open the entire cord, since in the upper positions processes arcernach through a groove according to the shape of white grayce.
Therefore remove that with the drapes which you have wrapped between the fingers said at the sides in front and twist between the right and left hands until it is completely removed.
And keep that from entering into the groove so that you don't get to the eye and turn away this one.
May if your arcernach does not appear at the beginning of the groove, rather you adjust in the groove a small thing so that it processes arcernach; and then remove this one as we have said; and then return drapes to him in water and oil and place them on the area and rub those with dust.
And so that they mix salt and they place that in the cavity of the groove so that what is left of this humidity.
And then cure that within that is healed.
May if it occurs in the area an inflammation of the skin, then cure that with plasters of cerate within that is healed.
Chapter 11.
Of ways to treat the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes are born by the adjustments of the natural pels and are old, then those to the eye and cause ways of illnesses thus with tears frequent and softening of the eyelids and membrane within that is the cause of destruction of the eye which is called tacinir of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: or per cauterium by fire; or by acute medicine according to what has been said before in the chapter on cauterium; or it is done atactin through incision and suture; or by cannas according to that it sees.
And therefore you keep the head of the patient in your right hand; turn the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it turns, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into that in which it is faithful from the sides of the eyelid, and let it enter the needle through that one, and so— next to the margin of the eyelid where there are no pels— next to the pels, and pull the thread up to the sides with the eyelid, and turn that to the right.
And then put in the edge within the eyelid of pels adjusted to the spatula entering through the lacrimal major next to the lacrimal mendre; and then remove the thread and leave it on the eyelid with dusts small of cot or of drap, and then tie it up on the eyelid with a knot, and so be thus with a figure of a leaf.
But nonetheless it is the figure according to the quantity of helevacio of the eyelid, since that has already been diversified in men, since those whose eyelids are molified by a large amount according to the amount with which the eyelid is softened.
And then put in the spatula on the two lines that you have outlined, and begin from the lacrimal major next to the lacrimal menor. And if your groove is next to the natural pels thus with it is the thickness of the king.
And then place the wax in one of the two angles of the cord, and then scrape that completely, and then adjust with the knife the two lips with a thin thread or wool, and then wipes off the blood, and makes adhere what is superfluous of the threads on the two eyebrows for some mysterious reasons, if you want to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
And then leave the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then cure that.
And if you want, leave the suture of six sutures, and cure that with water that dries and hardens, since the eyelid is raised by the seal of the suture and the aggregation of it; but six sutures are better. And therefore I have said about the ancient ways of treating.
But nonetheless in him is sollicited on the head, and it is a good operation, and it is not in fear.
And it is another way in تاکmir, and it is that you outline on the eyelid a figure thus with a leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three separate and gathered nails according to this form:
May if it is not possible there, have the nails, and since it is not wrapped, then take a needle in which there is thread and put that in the center of the figure, and insert the other needle next to the lacrimal major, and the thread according to next to the lacrimal mendre, and adjust the threads between the fingers said with equality, and then lift up the whole cord on the side which is outlined thus with the have described above.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure that within that is healed.
May if it occurs an inflammation of the skin due to your incision or your groove, then that inflammation with cerat and similar things, and wet it.
In some cases the pels of the eyelid are converted, so that when you use in that of the incision; but the suture is more artificial.
Tاکimir with cannas is according to this form: And if there is no way to cure the eye, nor a way to comfort it, and so leave it without treatment. And that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure within that I have outlined according to what I have said; and then by art make two needles or two thin stars of the length which is the length of the eyelid and its width be next to the width of the spatula. You have already outlined in the edges of any parts, where you have the threads.
Then add some of the threads with subtlety under the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the needles of any parts with a strong closure, and leave that for some days, since the cord by the stricture will die and rot, and so it will not be able to close.
May if it is delayed, then cut the thread with the tweezers, and then cure that within that is healed.
So it is fixed, the eyelid is raised and the pels do not poke.
And this is the form of two needles which you will make according to this form: and it has neither a quantity of length nor a quantity of breadth more or less.
Chapter XII.
Of the raising of nails with the awl when the nail is hard.
When the nails are not natural, hard, and sharp, then perform the operation in a careful manner: take a fine needle, place it at the tip of the soft sinew, and adjust the ends carefully, without making a mark. And let the length of the threads be of a quantity corresponding to one palm.
Then take another fine thread and tie it in a knot, and cut off the ends, if you wish.
Then place the patient's head on your lap and position yourself so that the light falls on your work; for the operation is subtle and delicate.
Then insert the needle into the root of the nail with care; let it penetrate the eyelid swiftly so that you remove it from the natural nail.
Then pull out the nail and insert it into the eye; let there be one, two, or three, not more.
Then take your hand away from the patient's eye so that the nail is removed with the lid attached; let it not be separated from the natural nail.
If the lid is separated from the nail, then take the lid to another place by means of the thread attached to it; let it not be separated from the nail above.
Then let the person look at the nail; if the lid has been separated, then take the thread and cut off the ends of it; let it not be attached to the nail above for two or three days, so that the nail may heal well and good flesh grow on it.
If the nail is loose, then adjust a long nail from among the natural nails; let it be raised with that, or let it remain in place until it has been adjusted; then let it be raised.
Chapter XIII.
Of the treatment of the eye which is inside the eyelid.
When the eye is affected with a bulging which is caused by a contraction of the eyelid into it, or to the right or left side, because of an ill-founded inflammation or section or cauterization, and this is called leukoma, and this leukoma is either natural or accidental, and is produced by an inflammation or section or cauterization, or by a similar resemblance to its malady.
Then the manner of performing the operation is that you open that consolidation and separate the eyelids from each other; place a piece of linen between them and bind them together so that they remain in that position until they are healed.
Do not use any treatment of the eye for the causes which dry it out and contract it; for if you make it wet, you will increase the pain rather than lessen it while there is fire on it.
Use on it of remedies which soften it in the case of a fever, with fenugrec, and bathe it with warm water in which there is salt or a liquid oil, and dip the pad in it, and treat with that.
The treasure of your treatment is that you should not apply any remedy to a consolidated eye according to the way in which it was burning at the beginning.
This operation which we have described is nothing but a correction of a bulging which does not return the form of the eye according to how it was burning before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment of a bulging which is caused by a contraction of the eyelid on the inside.
This remedy which is applied to a bulging on the inside of the eyelid, which is called an acromedical remedy; and it is either natural or accidental.
It may be accidental because of a swelling or section or cauterization or by any similar resemblance.
And the way to perform the operation is that you take a fine needle which has double thread on it, and let it pass through the lacrimal bone from the left side into the right, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the bone.
Then stretch out the bone at its ends by means of the needle and cut it with the blade, and mark it with a wide spatula. Then, if the eyelid returns to its form when it is bent, it is good; otherwise, take a thread and fix it in the division of the two eyelids, and turn them towards each other, and make the two slits in the middle of the eyelid.
Then let the ends of the two slits meet at two angles of the incision, which have been made so that they meet, and may be formed into a figure by their convergence.
And this figure is the Greek letter alpha: A.
Then fix the bone by the amount corresponding to the width of it on either side of the eyelid, so that it sews the eyelid.
Then adjust those parts which are separated and stitch them together with a woolen thread; then treat those with water which we have spoken of as being soft, and with fomentation, so that they may be healed.
If the bulging or section or cauterization is to be treated by a slit or stitch or cauterization, then, if it is necessary to make a flat slit according to what has been said before, Then separate the two eyelids according to what we have spoken of.
In the addition of the speech of the treatment which is applied to a bulging on the inside or outside of the eyelid, which may be performed in the manner of a remedy, and that is done with various kinds of remedies;
The expert should always prepare himself in any way which is possible for him to cause the return of the form to its natural form, or near to it, and the operation and instruments in the best possible conditions.
Chapter XV.
Of the Adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in those who are in a fever, and the edge of the eyelid is stuck to the membrane which is on the inside of the eye, and the movement of it is prevented; then, when you introduce the tip of the needle between the eyelid and the membrane, lift it up, or extend it towards the upper lid.
Then you cut the adhesion with a fine blade; which should not be sharp at the edges of the incisions, taking care that the thread does not catch the edge of the blade so as not to disturb the operation, and leaving the spatula which does not injure the eye by its keenness.
And let your incision remove that adhesion with ease so that the eyelid may be returned to its natural form, and all adhesion be healed.
Then take to the eye salt water which you wash with; or distill in it Zuni's water which is dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a calk; let it rest on wool infused with the album of an egg, and then use the third day because of consolidation causes so that they may be healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of Incisions in the ungul and the prominence of the lacrimal bone.
Know that the ungul is according to two ways; either it is nervous, and it is similar to hard ciphac (substance) which is soft; or it is not nervous, and it is similar to white ice which, when it melts, takes with it the thread to which it has been attached, and then it falls off.
And both of these spices do not begin to be cooked until the tear duct has been reached, which slowly and steadily covers the eye and prevents light and movement of the eyes.
The way of working in the incision is that the patient should sit with his head between your knees, and then open the eyelids, raise the eyelid to your hand, and collect the eyelash with some double-sided tape and extend it at the edge. And take an needle and insert it into that with a hair of horse or cow or goat, or fur, or double the end of the needle little by little and leave that in the middle of the lash, and pierce it with the needle through the eye; then tie that with thread, and extend that at the edges, and remove those hairs from the edge, and cut off those hairs at the edge where the pupil is. Then you should continue doing this with the hair inside the eye.
And then you should cut the root of the tear duct with a thin scalpel or small scissors, and let the natural tears flow without interruption through that incision.
And sometimes the lash is extended with a single thread or thread, and then you should cut it with a lion's scalpel, whose shape is this:
Keep in mind that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the scalpel, and that the rupture does not occur on the pupil, and that the pupil is punctured.
Then the incision should get into the eye a little salt mixed with fine sand, and leave that inside for another day; then wash those eyes with water so that they are healed.
If the lash is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in, or if it does not stick to the thread, then these kinds of lashes are cured with medicines, and are healed in this way with eye and treatment in the division.
If you want to cut that hair, then open the patient' eyes and take a lion' sharp scalpel following this form: with subtlety. If that hair is rarefied and contracted and enters the eye, then distill it from your own oil in the eye with a fine thread or salt, and wash those eyes inside out for another day.
Then repeat the operation on that hair until all of it is removed, but if any remains, then cut that out with a scalpel, for you should leave that, and at the beginning heal the cut within it, so that it is healed.
Then repeat your operation on that hair with reason until it is healed.
The removal of the tear membrane, if it is a great harm to the eye, should be suspended with thread; and cut that hair from one edge, and do not finish the incision so that the tears do not flow.
Then distill in the tear membrane a fine thread or salt until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of incisions of algorings and of water that is born from adjusted flesh in the eye.
Some of the veins in the eyelids are born with flesh that is red, and it is placed next to the pupil so that it covers it, or it is brought closer or further from the eye, and presses the eyelids together at the edges, and is joined by a knot of thread.
The operation in it is that the patient should sit with his head between your knees, and then open the eyelids, and collect all that hair with some scissors convenient to water, and wash that water with one forceps or a basket; and then cut off that hair at the beginning until it is completely finished with the incision, and be careful of the eye that does not rub it, so that your operation is complete.
And be the incision that you cut those or with a scalpel whose shape we have described in the incision of the eyelash, or with small scissors with which it is collected according to the form of that scalpel that corresponds to this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with salt, or distill in it powder that tastes red and similar to the corrosive medicines, and place over the edge a bandage with a patch of wool, so that it is secured from the cut by a knot.
If there is any cause of algorings and it is serious, and you fear an apoplexy, then leave that eye and heal the apoplexy with water, and then repeat the operation on that hair until it is healed, and set that cut flesh in the eye of this kind.
But above all, you should know that you remove any cure of the eye by means of fire, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of gathering of flesh on the eye.
Such veins are red and do not allow the operation to be performed, and the eye heals with the length of days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which the flesh is gathered is strong and in which there is not another illness than that flesh, then collect that flesh.
And it is that you order the patient to sit with his head between your knees, and suspend those veins with one thread or two according to your prudence; and let that thread be a double one according to this form:
or so two threads in a knot according to this form:
And then those veins are gathered with fine scissors, with subtlety, and you wash the blood every hour or two, so that those veins are dried up on the eye and are rolled over.
Keep in mind that you do not rub the eye with the edge of the scalpel; and if your operation is in the morning before noon, and be firm in your operation so that you do not cut those veins.
When you have finished, then distill in the eye a fine green or red to cause the corrosion that heals it from the gathered flesh.
If water is not possible for you to collect all of it in an hour, and then you should fill it with the amount that can be collected, and let it stand for several days so that it is dried up, and secure it from the cut by a knot.
Then repeat the same method until it is healed.
This is the shape of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
Of reducing of aridity to the nose.
When you cure aridity with a hot cauterization or acute medicine according to what precedes it in the narrative and is not healed, then do not let that enter into it but extract all the moisture that exists in it, and let the dust escape from it so that the bone is exposed.
And therefore, when the bone is exposed and becomes corrupted or black, then you should use an instrument whose shape is this:
It is called a sharp cap, and is made of iron, and is filed with a file or rubbed with a file according to the following shape.
Then place that over the damaged location of the bone, and turn it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is smooth.
It is made smooth with a few drops of water, and then restores the place with causative and strictive agents.
So that the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh hidden from the scythe and it separates the body from the sania and remains for 30 days, and does not renew itself nor does it pus, and does not happen to him an accident, then you know that he has healed.
And if not, then do not let it become engorged, but reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this method: that you discover by second os am ferr or am medicina acuta, and with care uncover the os, then you take according to this form:
The tip of the iron is triangular, and the furrow of the iron is first weakened at the end, as often as necessary.
Then place that above the bone, and that is close to the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the hilt, and place your hand on the tribe within so that it enters all the bone, and that feels pain for assault that it sends up through all of its parts, and does not come out.
Then restore the location with stenous medicines drying it out as often as you wash him.
Then when the flesh at the location is hardened, then the substance that was flowing out from the fissure returns to the nose, so it is a lighter pus over the patient.
Chapter .XX.
Of reducing the prominence of the hilt.
When the hilt emerges in its totality and does not happen to him an accident or a decrease, then you know that you have loosened the patient, and follow according to this method: and place air on the throat with gentle breathing and sucking for good sucking; and place oil over the hilt with made-up powder, and strengthen the plaster on the hilt with fine powder.
And the method of the powders is that you take sheepskin cloth made from lions' hair, and each cloth be doubled four times; and make these clothes into powder.
And place those one above the other according to the quantity that the hilt needs. And strengthen those above each other with a sturdy and tight cloth; and repeat the air with gentle breathing and sucking for good sucking; and place the air and leave the hilt stretched over the day and the night.
But if in the meantime the ligament is softened, then you know that it should be tight.
And hold the ligament close to the day and the night as often as necessary.
And if the hilt has already been reduced, then good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the tightness and the air within so that it is healed.
Chapter.XXI.
Of the incision of the prominence of the eyelid.
When there is a disruption in the eyelid, and it is prominent and comes out of place, then cut the eyelids as often as necessary with a sharp razor; it is fitting for the form of man through it, and wants to cut it, then perform the operation within so that it has been mentioned, that you introduce the needle into the root of the eyelid from the part of the lacrimal, and let it enter according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double thread and take it with the same needle of the other part, and make it come out through the first hole according to its position, and strengthen that one.
And then take the needle and place it on the hilt wetted with wool infused with egg white, and let it remain within so that it comes out through the eye according to its position, and strengthen it.
And then heal the hilt with water that comforts him within so that the plague is healed.
And in some cases of all parts, with a circle of cloth is adjusted to the prominence of the hilt, and let it be pierced by the fine blade that reaches the front of the hilt, and run the watery pus, and lower the hilt and enter so quickly.
And strengthen it within so that it is healed.
Chapter.XXII.
Of the treatment of eyes.
This evil called alconta is not but a disease that is adjusted in the hilt resembling falling water and it is not that one.
But the way of working in it is that you make the patient lie on his back and face up, and take your cap on two sides of it, and place those over so that the eye reaches the parts from which the disease comes, and let it dry, and do not let it come down, and keep the light, and the patient sees the causes as often as possible.
And if it does not come down in the lower parts, you know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared for the descent of the disease with water that we have mentioned, then make the patient lie on his side and take a fine blade and place it on the part about the panniculus cernent a small devés the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (in front of the eye) within so that it is removed.
Then, when it is removed, you distil in the hilt water tail into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already built fenugrec and honey.
And let it be healed with the other causes within so that it is healed.
Chapter.XXII.
Of the treatment of the water that descends from the hilt.
We have already mentioned the spices of the water in the division and what it convents to pierce with the blade declaring, then do according to health.
Then you know that you make the patient lie on his side on a table and place the hilt in its position, and keep it firm.
And place your hand next to the eyelid of the hilt with your left hand, if the water is in the hilt on the left side; or with your right hand, if the water is in the hilt on the right side.
And place your right hand behind the hilt, if the hilt is on the left side; or your left hand behind it, if the hilt is on the right side.
And place the end of the hilt next to the crown for the thickness of the blade in the eyelid on the inner part, and place the almagda with skill and turn your hand towards it.
And pierce into the hilt's album and feel that the almagde has already reached the cause of the vision.
Then you know that the measure of the path of almagde to the front of the hilt is the measurement of the space from the pupil within to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the hilt; for you see that pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the eyelid cornea.
And place the almagde within the hilt in the place where the water descends, and then throw another blade towards the other side, and if the water descends quickly, then wash the patient with it quickly, and almagde in his hilt.
And wait a little; then if the water descends, then you stop that other blade before the almagde is removed.
Then when it is dry and does not come down, then you extract almagde easily, and turn it a little at a time, and dissolve a little clear salt from the gem in water and wash the hilt within; and place the hilt outside of the cloth or stop or wool infused with rosewater and egg white, and keep the eye clean.
But these are things that only belong to our time, resting on that one with the top trisseled with rosewater.
And if you do not obey your almagde to the hilt because of its hardness--for some men the hilt is hard from nature, then know that you take the blade which is called alabaster and this is its form:
And so pierce that connection, and do not stop your hand in the wound, and there is no need for you to push the blood out of the place.
Then introduce the needle second as we have said.
And you must compliment on your work, a patient is prepared in the sleeping room like this, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark house, and all movements are prohibited.
Then pause the flow of urine so that it is liquid in nature, and do not tickle his head to the left or right.
And the operation according to its disposition within three days.
Then remove that one in that dark room and examine the vision carefully, and return the operation within seven days.
Do not add that you should make water at the time of the cure or even less add an infusion. While avoiding that you should add water, for it leaves the urine in great quantity and violently with regard to the patient.
If there is any fever after three days, then if you remove that bandage in front of the foot on the seventh day, and correct that wound with water which gives fever.
Then you have cleaned his face and put it over his mouth for the purpose of keeping his breath away for a few days, he exists in the dark room.
And let that patient get up gradually from that bed and speak about their causes.
And you know that in surgery it is not allowed to have a blind sight, and then you are diligent about the operation.
And we have already reached some of those who are in the art of surgery, and some said that they made fire in the Airac by piercing it with a needle, and water was drawn out.
But as to the use of water in our country, it has not been perfected yet, nor is it known that water was taken from the ancient books or from the ancestors' practice; and it may be new.
These are the forms of the medicines that you should do to those who don't know them:
The are made of iron itself, and the ends of their needles are triangular, the acute tip is also like that, and this is the form.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure for a nose wound.
When in the nose there are various kinds of meat, adjusted for different causes, which is assembled with a weight of pain, or it is a polyps because it resembles that peys represented. And from it comes cancerous meat, a bone, of a dark color; and from it comes lion's meat, not of a dark color.
Then in that one which is not fraudulent or cancerous from those lions' meat, you must make points between his toes, and put the needle on them, and pierce the skin of him, and cut the flesh with a sharp knife. Then remove that one from between the toes, and cut off with a sharp knife what you have understood of it with a thin blade from one part to another until you know that all the meat has been removed; and if by chance there is any reason why the removal is possible, then remove that water with a sharp tool from him easily. If the patient has a high fever or chills with an apostema, then you should pause that water which is coming; or if it is from malicious apostemas, then you should cut and cauterize that one within that there are no openings.
Then remove that one with a sharp incision, and water or vinegar. If the nose bleeds and you see moisture coming out of the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as far as it should, then you know that inside him there is no meat in the upper bones of the nose where there has been no removal.
Then introduce the needle firmly into the one who has any grossness, and suck it up with the thumb, and pause between each nut the amount of water or less, and place the needle on the nose with the point or another reason that is possible to do it.
Then when the water has come out, and the smell of it has entered into the nose channels, and has been thrown over his nose, because ten times more sight has been given to the children in school, and there is no cause for that one who wants to do it.
Then pause the two extremities of the needle, one that comes out over the nose and the other that comes in the nose, and pause the thread of meat on those nuts which are in the needle's point, and water comes out that you know that the meat has already come out.
Then remove the needle, and pause in the nose the abscission of a single hair, and water comes out for three days or more within that it is rustling meat.
Then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for the sake of days within that it is healed.
If you know of any cure that works, use that one.
And this is the form of the medicine that cleans and makes liquid in the nose:
Make water of silver or iron, which is like a small lamp lit, so with a little ring, and the meat resembling in shape.
If you want, make a closed tube like this with a cane, and the tube of the medicine-making instrument is flat and open; to which you should have that one when you squeeze oil or water out of it, or out of its juice and of the causes you can use it.
Chapter 25.
Of the nose wounds at the ends.
A wound in the tips of the nose is a great and painful thing to do in several days within which motion comes out from it.
And with water that you should cut off that one at the beginning of its appearance, and suck out all of it. Then place over the wound or cauterize or apply a burning medicine which is in the same place as that one.
If the patient's incision is delayed within that it is great, then consider if it is hard and of a dark color and has little feeling, then do not touch that one with iron because it is an apostema of old age; for the sake of that one which you have cut out through the great evil over him.
If the apostema is of a lion's touch and not of a dark color, and when an incision can be made in all of it, then remove that one with fear and cure the wound with water that comes out and applies a counterirrent within that it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the nose suture, and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarity.
You know that when this one happens to solve the continuity of any of these cartridges, it is not done in that operation, but in some men.
So you see, whenever any of these causes occurs and you consider it to be a fresh plague, then you should adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and then cure what is inside to make it heal.
And if the lips of cure of continuity are already separated and each is made whole, then you should know that you should cut off any piece of its cord that appears inside so it doesn't become infected. Then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle dragon's blood and triple- Strengthened (insult), and place over the powder a thin piece of plaster of gold, or of some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave it there for two days or three, then remove it and replace that plaster and cure what is inside to make it heal.
The way of sewing is that you add the cure of continuity or with needles as we have already described in sewing the belly, or you add the cure of continuity with gold as well, so that it should be known.
Chapter .xxvii.
Of the Extraction of What Causes Come in the Two Lips in the Separations Inside.
There are various types of infections that can occur in the two lips inside the separations: small warts resembling little pieces of flesh, and some of them are small and some are large.
And if you should convert the lips and open up each of those dureties completely, then you should fill in the place with dragon's blood three times so that the plague is restricted, and then you should wash it with vinegar and cure the place with water that is styptic, so that it should heal.
Chapter.xxviii.
Of the cutting of the flesh adapted to the gums.
A large number of small white warts can be found on the adapted flesh to the gums, so that if you should suspend it with a string or have it placed in a container and cut it into pieces, then let it run away or let the blood flow.
And then place over the area dragon' s blood three times or other stypic or caustic powders.
And if that flesh returns, then you should cut it again secondarily, and cauterize it, because the cauterization will not return.
Chapter.xxix.
Of Reason for Teeth with Iron.
When in the surface of the teeth in the separations inside and in the forehalves and between the gums are adapted rough scales, some are black and some are yellow or green inside the gum, and the teeth themselves break off.
And whenever you should file between your teeth and place the top of the foot on the leg, then chisel out those scales and causes resembling sand before they become too dark or yellow or green, so that the blackness and yellowness and other colors are removed from them before they become too much.
Then if that water is in those at the beginning of the reason, then it is not; and if not, then you should repeat the reason over those at another day and again and again until you arrive at the last statement where you want to stop.
And you should know that the teeth require different types of instruments and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. And because the razor used to make the tooth's separation inside is different from the razor used to file between teeth according to other shapes, those forms of razors are always prepared for you to see soon:
Chapter.xxx.
Of Teeth Eradication.
Then you should cure the tooth from its pain and delay it completely in the eradication of it, because there is no cause that replaces the substance of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublimated substance that is excusable in the eradication of it.
But whenever the foot is forced to eradicate that tooth, then firmly you should certify yourself as to which tooth hurts, because the pain of the foot disconcerts and hinders you from doing it in a healthy tooth, and then you eradicate that one and the pain does not cease until the painful tooth is eradicated as well, for we have already seen this by operation of the toes.
Then you should certify yourself as to which tooth hurts, and you know it well, then whenever you should scarify in the circuit of that tooth with a sharp knife so that there is no virtue left, until it is dissolved from the gum completely at the beginning, and then cut it little by little with a delicate pair of scissors until it becomes very small.
And then bind in a strong cloth with a good knot or a sharp object, and place the top of the foot between the toes that you have placed on one side so that it does not hurt, and then take the tooth out secondarily in a way that it is not broken, nor does the pain of the foot cause.
And if it is not a forehawled tooth, then take one of those instruments, and put that under the gum completely with ease and try to remove it in the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then whenever you should wrap that tooth with a thread and tie it tightly at the end of the thread, and then take it out little by little in the way that it does not break in your hand's grasp during the time of its contraction on that one.
And whenever you should open completely for the scarification in the circuit of the gum completely and keep your strength so that it does not break and repair the separation of it, and return to the foot for its malice that is less than the first pain of it.
And keep in mind that you should not file with those barbers in their final stage and audacity on the eradication of them, for we have already described this; because there are those large teeth-removing men that are more difficult to be broken than the ones that are cut off, and all of their roots entirely, or some of them, or you extract that one with some bones of the mandible in such a way as has been reported by some.
And then the eradication of it should be washed with vinegar or vinegar in salt water.
And if there is a flow of blood from the tooth like rain, then whenever you should cut a little quantity of cheese and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, then cauterize it.
The shape of the tweezers and forceps is delicate for the tooth to be removed at the beginning is of a long handle, a short handle, and a large grasp, so that they are not doubled when acting with them.
And be like this whenever you start working with those handles so that they are not doubled, they are short ends.
And they are forged of iron from the right side and the ends are forged of steel, and in the ends of those is found a tooth that intren the other teeth and comes out by a contraction, and some of the ends of them are the shape of the beak of a dove that has no ciconia, so it is sharp, and they are very strong to contract.
Chapter.xxxi.
Of the Eradication of Teeth and the Disintegration of Bones of the Mandibles that are Broken.
Then whenever you should stop the tooth that is broken from causing a certain reason, then you should pause over the place with a cloth for a day or two until the place becomes soft; and then apply a kind of glue to the ends of those that are assembled together like the beak of a dove called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the tweezers:
The extremities of their hands were wrapped inside so with linen or wool.
And if you do not obey to pull them up with these forceps or hold them, then remember that you cover the root and separate all the meat and introduce the instrument which has this name, for its shape is this:
And of thick leather a small one, and it should not be wrapped up so that it does not become wrinkled.
Therefore if the root is torn out by water, it is good; and if not, help you with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at the end, in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and its smaller end should be sharp.
And you are helped with these instruments, having two ramps of which this is the form close to the following: And with other instruments that will be needed in shaving teeth; for this tool is made like an apple and its form is this:
of the triangular end bent or short, which has some thickness, and it should not be wrapped up so that it does not become wrinkled.
And you know that the tools for teeth are like the others instruments.
May the artisan be wise and skilled in this art, he will understand how to operate and treat different illnesses; for they are diseases which the ancient did not know or pause their own instruments for the forms of different species.
If the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken or crushed, then it is necessary to be careful in that place with the water which is convenient for them of the instruments and of the forceps which we spoke about when extracting the roots of teeth; and help yourself with these actions whose form is this:
And it should be in some small thickness from little to little, and should be tied up or held on the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely torn out; then restore the place with medicines suitable for water.
If in the bone is small fracture, then he cuts off that part of the fracture and its blackness, and heals it within so that it is cured.
Chapter LII.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
When prominent teeth are not in line with their natural course according to the shape of them, and most when they protrude toward the females, and especially the older ones; then remember that you consider: if a tooth is not next to another tooth, and it cannot be removed or oiled with it, then cut it out; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you separate it with this instrument whose form is similar to the morra of pig, and is made from Indian iron of sharp end.
And it should be your incision which you will make in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not connected to any other teeth.
And if a prominent tooth is being removed by grinding, then grind it with the Indian iron which has this shape:
And it should all be of Indian iron and its margin is rounded; and it should have points that are made with the knife according to the form of needles, with which the tooth is ground little by little in two days with ease, so that no other tooth is connected to it and it falls out. Then tie up that part in a loop, and cut it off with razor blades.
If the tooth has one part that is broken and it causes the tongue to be caught, then remember that you grind off that part of the root where the roughness of that fraction is caught, and it is made thin so that the tongue does not get caught or the word gets corrupted.
Chapter LIII.
Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
When the teeth are injured or moved by impact or impact, and the patient cannot bear water that burns, and you have treated it with stipulative medicines, and your treatment has not been successful, then remember that they do not get infected because they are tied up with gold wire and not with silver, for silver becomes green and disintegrates after a certain time; but gold does not change.
And be the wire in such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the cut is that you take the wire and make it twice as long between two healthy teeth, and you wrap it around two bent parts of the wire between two broken teeth, or if one or both are broken, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the same process to the other part of which you started; and tighten your knot with ease and skill until it is not too tight.
And tie it up with a knot that holds the wire to the roots of the teeth so that they do not move away.
And you cut off the excess ends of the wire with forceps or tweezers; and add them in any place with actions, and hide them between a healthy tooth and a broken tooth, so that they do not damage the tongue. And then let it lie there stretched out with a string.
If it is slipped or broken, tighten that one or those with another wire in such a way during all times.
This is the form of teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, so tied:
When one tooth or two return to their places in their locations, and they are healed thus with a string tied, and it remains like this.
And do not know but skilled and wise artisans.
Some broken ones are suitable for the cause of the bones of a cow, and it is made like a tooth, and it is stopped in that place where the tooth fails, and it is tightened thus with what has been said, and remain in that way for a long time.
Chapter LIV.
Of the grinding of the tooth which is seen in the tongue and prevents speaking.
This ligament which leaves the tongue some times or is natural to the person who doesn't speak, or it happens by accident because of a disease that has already been established.
And the operation for him is that he opens the mouth of the patient, and the tongue is raised, and you cut off that nervous ligament according to its thickness so that the tongue does not get caught in its knot.
If in that is some hardness or stiffness, and water stands because of the consolidation of the disease, then you grind it once and cut it off according to its thickness so that the knot is cut and the ligament is dissolved.
And remember not to cause a split in the skin of the flesh, and cut here the bone's bone and take off the blood flow with water.
And then rinse the trace of the incision with clean water or salt water or fresh water; and then leave the tongue alone for a while so that it does not get consolidated again; and this is the treatment which leaves the tongue alone after rinsing it, so it heals quickly.
If a flush of blood occurs, apply a poultice to the affected area; if the blood flows, then cauterize that place with an antiserum that is applied in water. And this part is healed with other treatments until it is cured.
Chapter LXV.
Of the extraction of the ranula without touching the tongue.
Some women have happened to leave the tongue apophthegmatic like a small nameless prevent the tongue from its natural operation, and very strong is it glorified in that place which it fills.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient before the sun and see the apophthegm.
And if you turn it black or dark in color, but hard, on which the patient does not have a sense, then do not touch that one because it is hard.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put honey on it and cut that one with a fine scalpel, and cut all of it; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you pause and wash it thoroughly, for it is bitter, before you cut off the blood.
Then return to your work as soon as you have finished it completely without leaving anything behind, and wash it with vinegar and salt; and cure that one with the other treatment with water until it is cured.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of extraction of the apophthegm from two ears and that which is not in the jaw, and of the other apophthegms.
When it comes out in the jaw, so are glands that are gathered together glandular mass, which happen sometimes at first and are called two ears, which when you treat them with water that I have mentioned above in the division, and if they are not cured, then consider whether the apophthegm is hard, of black color, of little feeling, do not touch that one because it is hard.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that one because of the blood flow; let it mature on its own, and then you tear it off or cut it off yourself.
And if it is of whiteness color, soft, and the root is fine, then that one needs to be cut with a scalpel.
And the operation on it is that you consider, in front of your operation, if the apophthegm has rested completely or has decreased at all; and then the patient lies before the sun, his head turned to one side, and the mouth is opened, and the servants hold their hands.
It should be made of silver or of brass, and it should be fine with a knife.
Then when you press it with your hand and show the apophthegm to you, and place honey on it, and cut that one at both ends as much as you can. And another water that does not cause the tunics to come off, and then cut that one with the instrument of which this is the form:
And another water that does not cause the tunics to come off, and then cut that one with the instrument of which this is the form: It is assembled with forceps, however, the ends of it are sharp, so that the orifice of each one is on the edge of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron sharpened on both sides.
If this instrument is not with you, then cut it with a scalpel of which this is the form: It should be sharp on one side and dull on the other.
And then after cutting one of them, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then cut the mouth of the patient with a clean scalpel, and wash it thoroughly with water.
If there is a flow of blood from the patient, wash it with a decoction of oak galls or with leaves of mulberry and similar things up to that point where the blood flow is stopped, and then cure that one until it is cured.
And in some cases there are more apophthegms in the jaw than those two ears, and you cut them according to what I have said above in the cutting of two wounds in the head.
And I have already treated a woman with an apophthegm which was born in her jaw, the apophthegm which tended to black color, of little feeling, and which had closed her jaw, and the woman breathed without difficulty, and she had forbidden her from eating or drinking water, and she was about to die if it were not stopped soon.
The apophthegm had come so far that there were two gaps in it, which opened and closed twice.
Then I held firm with one of my hands and cut it with the other, and threw it away far from me, and then I looked at the gap in the other hand, and then I pressed the mouth of the patient and closed the tongue, and then I put the instrument into the apophthegm.
Then I cut off a large part of it, and it did not flow with blood except for a little bit. Then completely I closed the jaw of that woman, and she began to drink water immediately, and then I did not continue cutting that apophthegm after a long time, and it was replaced by another apophthegm which opened in place of it.
Then I went around and cauterized the jaw of the patient, in addition to that; then I continued to walk and did not know what to do with myself.
Chapter.xxxvii.
Of cutting a wound when it is apophthegmatic.
When it comes out in the mouth, and it is apophthegmatic and long, then it is called a bubo; and if it comes out at the root, which is thick and round, it is called a lump.
But when it is cured with the water that I have mentioned above in the division, and if your treatment does not help it, and it still has apophthegm; and if it is long, and it bleeds, of black color or of red, and it hurts a little bit, then you consider whether you should cut it off completely, because there is fear about the patient.
And when you see that one according to the way I have said above about its whiteness and length, then you should cut it off completely and press the tongue of the patient with your hand on the instrument which I have mentioned, and then put the instrument into the new one, and cut that one down below, and cut it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the cutting of two wounds.
And you should not cut that one except with water which comes out naturally by itself, because if you cut it further, it will hurt the patient.
Then cut it, using water which I have mentioned above in the cutting of two wounds, and cure that one until it is cured.
If the patient is frightened by cutting it, consider using water in cauterizing it; and the way of cauterizing it is that you fill the concave part of the instrument with sharp water, and then cut it.
It should be filled in the concave part of it with medicine as much as the hollow of a spoon, and you place that one on the uvula, and then the patient moves his tongue back and forth because of the medicine inside it, so that it does not go out by chance from the mouth by way of the medicine which is inside.
Then take your hand away from the medicine and press it onto the uvula for a long time until the patient's breath is stopped because of the medicine which has been forced out by the uvula.
And if you wish, take a grip and wrap the thread around the extreme end of the ray, and immerse the grip in the medicine, and push the ray with the grip into a tube of about half an inch, so that the grip sticks to that tube, and make it go as often as you like into the cauterization of the grape, and let that stay there so that it dries up and falls off after three or four days.
And if you want to repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and let the cauterization be washed in the circuit of the grape with the grip embedded at the border, and rub it with water, and cure it well outside with ointment, and wash it again with soap that is cured.
And this type of treatment is safer than surgery and less feared.
Some are cured with a water that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with sub-fumigation in this way: Take garlic, hyssop, chamomile, marjoram, and other similar herbs, and put them all together in a cup, and immerse them in vinegar, and boil them; and the liquid be well drained, and placed in its place on the instrument of iron according to this method; it should be made of silver or iron.
And the end be inserted into the mouth of the patient in such a way that the vapour reaches the vocal cords over the bridge, so that the vocal cords are much darkened.
And repeat over those spots that are dry, and take care not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would be too sharp on the abscess, and do not make water go in, but rather leave a declaration of the abscess from him caut.
But if you don't have this instrument with you, take a cane and compose at the end of it a tube of leather, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, because the tube of the skin prevents the vapour from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter LXVIII.
Of the extraction of thorns and of water that adheres to the groin and of other causes.
Thorns that adhere to the groin or a thorn of pay or any other cause.
Then take out water that is apparent from it, and let the sight fall on it, because you press your tongue against the instrument in front of the sun, so that you can see the water that is in the groin.
And water that does not appear to you in the groin, take care not to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in his stomach, because it greatly delays the attached cause of the groin by vomiting; or let him drink a stone of naphtha or of radish or a piece of dry bread; or take a sponge of sea-grass that is dry and wet it with wine, and put it on firmly over the patient's mouth, and push it under his tongue, because when it reaches the place in which thorns are attached and are to be extracted, then push them under. Then take a snake and hold it in your hand, and if the patient' breathes, extract it; or take a weasel and hold it under the patient' nose, and if he breathes, extract it; or take a mouse and hold it under the patient' nose, and if he breathes, extract it.
But if you are not able to make them come out by those causes that we have mentioned, then take an iron instrument according to this form:
And it should be bigger than a needle, and in the end of it there should be a cavity that you can put into the patient' groin with ease.
And raise his head high up, and take care not to touch the side of the jaw with your hand, so that the patient' breath reaches his mouth, and if it is a tooth or a thorn that hurts him, or if he feels pain in his jaw, then make the treatment.
But the patient should go into it, and he should feel better because his sense of taste is not affected by the treatment; but take care that the cause of pain does not move to another part of the body, and that the patient' mouth or tongue do not come in contact with the instrument.
Chapter LIX.
Of the extraction of a bleeding sore attached to the groin.
When blood is treated with water that we have mentioned in the division of the treatment with medicines and do not taste it, consider first in the groin of the patient to the sun, because you have moved your tongue on the instrument that we have described.
Then if you find the bleeding sore, extract it with a small blade or with gentle touches.
And if you don't find it possible to extract it in this way, take a tube that is concave and insert it into the groin of the patient, and put an iron ring on the end of the tube, and make as many punctures as the bleeding sore has stopped and kept the patient from drinking water all day.
And then take a vessel full of soap water, and work the mouth of the patient in it, and wash the mouth with it; and don't drink any food or drink water for an hour after that, because the bleeding sore will soon stop when it feels the water.
But if it does not come out with water that we have mentioned, then sub-fumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument that we have described in the sub-fumigation of the vocal cords.
Make water, and do it quickly.
And it is another way of operating in sub-fumigation of the vocal cords, that you take a cup in which are ignited carbons and cover the cup with a blanket, so that there is a hole in it through which you can fit the end of the instrument; then make the sub-fumigation; and place the patient' mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the sub-fumigation does not come out until you know that the sub-fumigation has reached the bleeding sore, because the bleeding sore will soon stop.
And if it does not come out, then repeat the sub-fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, and eat salty foods and drinks, and don' t drink water, and then it will be necessary that in this treatment he does not come out.
And this is the form of the instrument that is used to extract a bleeding sore from the groin when it is seen; and it is like pliers as often as possible, but because it is in its curvature: which is placed on the groin, and its end is similar to an owl's beak, which is sharp, because when it touches any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter X.
In which is the sum of the speech in the appearance of abscesses and in section.
The abscesses are specific spots, and they appear in different ways, as you will remember from these words, from each one of them in this book.
And they vary in piercing and cutting them in two ways, one being the specific nature of the abscesses; and the other by dealing with their moisture.
And the second way is according to the places where they occur, because the accident of the abscess in the head is another one from the accident of the abscess in the neck; and the accident of the abscess in the flesh is another from the accident of the abscess in a joint; and each of them is subject to treatment.
And more of these are some that cover, so they should not be pierced but rather the growth of pus in them or their completion.
And more of these are some that cover and should not be pierced but rather the growth of pus in them or their completion. However, some blisters that are near joints, since the blister when it is next to a joint, its content extends into that joint and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so causing a spasm of that limb; or is a blister next to a main limb, and if you delay its piercing then it becomes inflamed towards the main limb; or is one near the anus, for this cannot reach the inner part of the anus, or does not cover well because it is next to the anus, so that it does not burst and is elongated towards the anus openings, and a fistula forms, or that it forms in the term of the blister that does not heal. May also cover that you know the time to pierce the blister, and then it is when it has become mature.
And know that it has become mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and a decrease in redness and swelling, and the tip of the blister becomes sharp, and other signs.
And since you know that piercing should be done in a place away from the blister's pus and pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
And pierce always at the length of the flesh or the body, if the blisters are in the parts of the limbs or feet, and in places of the intestines, nerves, arrases; and finally, in any place that is not reflected; because in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
May also when the blister is in a fleshy place, then pierce it within that its contents are completely digested according to their nature, as we have said; because if you pierce it before its contents are completely digested, the content will be prolonged inside, and it will cause much pain and swelling, and harden the lips and depth of the blister.
May also pierce some blisters according to the thickness of the flesh or body out of necessity, or according to its contents and the member that digests it.
And when you make a small hole, and in large blisters make a large hole and wide or many cuts according to the variety of the size of the blisters.
And some of the blisters that cover and should be pierced when they are already hardened, as we have said; because if you do it in a place where there is a lot of fluid, it will burst, and those who happen in two different places or in several parts, will cause great pain.
And of those that are not cut into three angles; and of those that are cut into the figure of an oak leaf, and of the blisters of the arms.
And of those that are cut roundly and moon-like, and similar to them.
May also to those whose blisters are superficial like lions, that you do not pierce them except with a small hole, or flat one only.
And when the blister is thick and has already collected some pus, then pierce it and do not cauterize it that all the pus comes out in that moment; take some out, and on another day take out a larger amount, and make holes according to its size so that it comes out little by little.
And most importantly if the patient is a man of courage, or a woman, or a small child, or an old person in declining health; because the animal spirit has much force to move out the pus, and greatly weakens the patient, and you should close them up.
Take care of this chapter with great caution, and consider that if the plague of the blister is small, or a flat cut, then administer the poultices of ash or cotton; and if the blister is large, and the cuts are wide, then know that you should pause a moment before going into any wound.
And if in the blister there is a part of the cord cut away or concaved within the circuit, then know that you should compress it with old cloth or a thread of linen, and when you have gone over it with pans or razors, moisten it; and strengthen it after three days; and proceed to treat the contents as described above, and cure what is in it, which comes out from within.
May also if it happens that there is a flow of blood at the time of your operation, then administer warm water and vinegar to the wound, wrap a cloth in it, and pause it over the place where the blood flows.
May also if the blood flow persists, then administer the medicines and powders that I have recommended in several places of this book and division.
May also if it is in wintertime, and the place of the blister is a place of cold nerves, then know that you should put powder made from wine or oil into the wound, and pause it over those places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then know that you should pause powder made from wine or oil, and all of this be applied within three days, as we have said; and when you cut away the blister, then administer to it what is recommended for its cure, which comes out from within.
And so is the water that is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of blisters in general; but, according to the distinction already made, each blister has its own way of being cured, which will be explained in another chapter.
Chapter .xli.
Of the cutting of blisters that come out at the top of the arm.
In the upper part of the arm small blisters, and from them come little nodules that contain skin that is soft; and from these little blisters there are little drops.
And their pus comes out like blood, and from those that contain water similar to lemon juice. And from those that contain water similar to blood, and like it; and from those that are dry, hard.
And in the cutting of all of them, and in the extraction of those that do not cause pain, you should not pierce them except with a small hole, or flat one only.
And the operation in cutting is that you apply them with the instrument that is called an entremes, within which you should know that it contains.
Because if the water contained is little, then cut it with a small cut according to this shape:
And start in the cutting of the line from B to G; then, when the water is evacuated, then scrape that skin for what it contains, and do not leave any trace of it, because four drops return if left on their own.
And dip it in Egyptian ointment if there is any, or in water and salt; and fill the blister with poultice, and leave it for another day, because with water it corrodies all that is underneath that film.
And dip it again in Egyptian ointment twice if it needs it, and leave it for another day, because you should know that there is no trace of the film left; then cure the plague with the ointment within, which will be healed.
And if the blister contains a lot of fat, then pierce it according to this shape: am seccio have a form of crotch, and geta oncis between two lips of the section and drag that of all start, and exert your virtue in extraction of the tunic which counts that.
Or if your surgery is causing you pain, then first let me tell you.
And seemingly cut the lymph node of the section and cure according to what you have said; and cut over lymph node is lighter, because it is little blood and little moisture.
And some times so cold of these lymph nodes which are in the head in some men who have entirely no moisture; and this is because you cut with a knife on a lymph node in the head of an old woman and turn back the lymph node thus with a sharp pain, dull, white, which cannot be cut, and if at anyone it was struck, it would plague him.
But in the other lymph nodes in the head this is not this chapter, so as the lymph nodes that come to the heads of children and their roots of ears, but the section of these all is superficial.
And pause the hole of those of all start lower than their for so that it is relieved the body of the disease to the starts lower.
Then approach cure those with water which are good to that of cure.
Chapter.
On section of the scrofulas which happen in the neck.
Spots seen may be these lymph nodes in the neck and in the shoulders and in the arms; and some spots happen to other parts of the body.
And those that happen in the neck, and such spots are born among them, and all scrofula of these is distinct from its own tunic, and so when in the nodes and lymph nodes of the head, have told.
The spices of these scrofulas are spots, because from these some lymph nodes, and those that contain moisture, and those that are malignant which do not obey to cure.
Therefore in that which you have good disposition in the Treatment, of which the color of water is manifest to the color of the wine, and it is nice to all start, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the surgery, and it is not thick, cover that you cut with a knife on a start from its surface to the start of the body of the line of .B., and score that of all start, and extend two or three oncis on the lips of the codena if there is need of these, so as we have said in the lymph nodes of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more careful that is not cut with a knife the vein or nerves.
And it is more careful that you do not cut with a knife the vein or nerves; because if you cut the vein or surgery and stop you from your operation, then pause in the plague of the threefold and other powders which remain fluxes of blood, and start the plague, and leave that within so that the acuteness of the lymph node is relieved and the plague is softened and begins to rot. When the blood is cut off.
Therefore returns to your operation within which you had made it complete.
Then ask the good doctor if there is any cause of these other small scrofula; then cut those and clean those.
And if it is in the root of the scrofula a great vein, cover that you do not cut that scrofula from its root. Ahead that you lie that with faithful double strong and that you leave that within so that it falls by itself if it does not harm.
Then fill the plague with old wine which you have already submired in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
And if you cut that scrofula all, then cover that you adjust the two lips of the plague and clean it little by little so that there is no waste of blood.
But if you think that there is waste of blood by the size of the scrofula, cover that you understand to cut the root of that, and remove it and administer sewing and water which is said.
And those scrofula which contain moisture, pierce that with the superficial hole here where appears to you the place of maturation of its body, and pause the hole of that water which is not the lower start of the body, as we have said.
Then administer the hole, like water and similar to those, so that it corrode that which is not of corrosion. Then when you see the plague already be cleaned, then you cure that with Egyptian ointment within so that it is healed.
Chapter.
On section of the lymph nodes which are in the head.
They said that this section is made in the epileptics, and I did not see any man in our land who had done that.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in the men they have a tendency to be evasive the extraction of the epileptics, as well as with water is not done well by all because all veins and major arteries are here.
But in those who have lymph nodes in the mouth or in the ears or two, when the malaria is not in the cane, cover that one escapes the section of epileptics to avoid the loss which is made by perforation.
Therefore when we want water, let us cut the epileptics from three circles of the circles of epileptics or four to a small section for the width in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in cyphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it lacks of meat and the vessels of blood are easily.
And if the medicine is little, cover that you extend the codena of the head from onci, and then cut the codena within so that it comes to the canal, and avoid the vessels of blood if there is no cause of these.
Then approach cut it according to what we have told; and is signified over the section of the channel by the light which is from that water which is of his disrupt and by the abscission of the voice.
And leave the plague open for a while.
Then when the hour is renewed in which the hole is made, add two lips of the codena of the plague, and cut that alone for the cartilage.
Then administer medicines which make the meat be healed within so that it is healed.
And Albucasis said that the summary of the sermon which we have told, exposition is not but that you see that some of these lymph nodes have already come out to the head of the patient, and the patient has come within death, and its air is cut off, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that it breathes the patient through the place of the plague for a breath, and be saved from death.
And by water I will leave the plague open within so that the evil of the malaria is consumed; and this is the evil of it for three days; and then the doctor will order thus the plague, and cure that within so that it is healed.
And water which I have seen for my metys, is that a servant holds a knife and cuts it in the head of his patient and cuts one start from the cane of the chest, and I was called to the cure of it, and turned back the blood when it was spitting of the patient, and discovered the plague and turned back the blood which was spitting of the plague little.
Therefore I confessed to him that he had not made any incision or scar on it, and yet the wound was healing and was completely cured.
And it did not happen to the servant until he was infected with the plague, and after about five days he returned to his normal condition.
Now I will tell you that in the section of the epileptic there is no danger.
Chapter .XLI.
Of section about an apoplexy that happens in the gut before, and is called a hernia from the gut.
This apoplexy, named a hernia from the gut, is great according to the color of the body, and occurs mainly in women.
It occurs in two ways, either it is natural or it is accidental.
And in the natural one does not cure.
And the accidental one is according to two ways, the one resembles fat nodules, and the other resembles an apoplexy that is made by a knot in an artery, and in that there is danger. And do not say that one should make a supposition about him with iron except in the small ones. And you should examine that one and investigate that one with care, and if it seems to you like a fat nodule and is not suspended on any of the veins, then cut that one open with scissors and extract what is inside, which will be blood; and if not, then examine all his body carefully, and treat the place where the disease occurs with a remedy that cures within that place.
Chapter .XLV.
Of section about species of nodules.
The nodules have different kinds, and I have already told you all their kinds in the division.
And that I should tell you the difference between a nodule and an excision with doubt.
Therefore I say that an excision has a hot feeling and fever and intense pains within which are relieved by the heat of the liquid; and it is completed by putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But in a nodule there is no heat or fever or pain, and it does not hurt when pressed; and if it does not feel like leather nor does it feel soft.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is with a knot, and it is made like this with air; and it has different kinds, for some are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are various, as I have already told you in the division.
Therefore, when you reach the cure of a nodule, examine that one and investigate that one at the beginning with an instrument called an introducer, according to which its shape will be found in the chapter that follows this one.
This is the way to investigate apoplexes and all nodules; it is because you take this instrument and introduce it into the place that seems most humid in the apoplexy, and turn the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the knot.
And then finish your examination according to the measure of the size of the apoplexy, and then remove the introducer and examine what remains; and if it is found that it has been in the place of another one, consider what remains.
And if the moisture has run away, of whatever color it is, then examine that one superficially according to what I have said about apoplexes.
And if there is no moisture in the trace of the introducer, then you know that it is fat.
Dry on top of it at section without having a shape like this: as I have taught you, and suspend that one on nails, and cut the knot from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack, if you can, onto that one, and extract the matter to the nodule.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that matter, and there are various kinds of blood in it, and you should extract them to pieces within which do not break anything for any reason.
For if it is broken by any means, little or much, the nodule returns according to the kind of matter.
And if you think that some part of it has broken off, then completely cure some corrosive and acute powder on it, and press it onto the apoplexy with a pointed instrument, and treat that one with another cure within which is cured.
And if the nodule is large, then you should cut it in two and treat that one with a remedy that cures within that one.
But if the pulse of the nodule is pulsating, opposite to that of the other one, then you should cut it and cover the place where it was cut with vinegar and leave that one in peace for three days within which it will cure and relieve the heat of the poison; and then return to cutting that one which is broken off from the nodule.
Chapter .XLVI.
Of the shapes of necessary instruments in section and puncture.
The shapes of introducers are three kinds, one large, another medium, and the third small.
The shape of the large introducer is like this:
The shape of the small introducer is like this:
If the instrument with which you work is of iron, and if it has rounded edges, and is pointed in a pleasant way, then introduce the introducer into the apoplexes.
These are called only three kinds of instruments, and one of them is called "a bird".
The three kinds are called, one large, another medium, and the third small.
The shape of a large experiment is like this:
The shape of a medium experiment is like this:
The shape of a small experiment is like this:
It should be known that the above shapes are suitable for apoplexes, excisions, fistulas, and abscesses to the extent that they apply to bones and other causes.
And the shapes should be round, large, and sharp, with large needles sewed on it, and they are made of lemon-colored thread, or iron thread, or silver thread; and the best to use is lemon-colored thread.
And the experiments of black plums are suitable for opening fistulas in the concavity of which they appear to be reflected, and for reflecting them onto their own surface.
The three kinds are called, some of them long, and others medium, and the third small, according to the measure of the width of the fistula and the strictness of it.
The shape of a large experiment made of lead is like this:
The shape of a medium experiment made of lead is like this:
The shape of a small experiment made of lead is like this:
The shapes of the nails are of different kinds, some of them simple, having only one curve, and there are three species: large, small, and medium.
And they are called nails or hooks, and there are three kinds.
The shapes of the nails with two curves are called, and there are three species.
The shapes of the nails with three curves are called, and they come in three species.
All of them are necessary in their place.
The shape of a small simple nail is like this:
Form of a large hole has two curves: Form of a small hole has two curves: Form of a small hole has two curves:
Form of a large hole has three curves:
Form of a small hole has three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels that I cut and scrape knots and pustules with them, and they are of three kinds, some large, some medium, and some small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The ends of those are sharp and the other ends are dull, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather so that it is cut smoothly in the excision of the knots with the fear of cutting a vein or a nerve, and by which it is healed the patient and also has some relief through the drying up of the pustule.
And these are the forms of poultices, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small, as you see them.
When it is done with the erasion and seems like water with alcohol added to it.
And it is in the outer end punctured with hidden spice and in those splints that run inside and outside, as you wish, thus sprinkled.
Forms of splints, which are wrapped between the legs so as to pierce the pustules and do not feel the pain, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small. And these are the forms of those:
Forms of leeches, with which is cut off the flow of blood, and they are of three kinds: large, medium and small; forms of the foot:
When it is done with the erasion and seems like a drop of blood, round in shape and some distance from the tip, and they are subtle.
And these are the kinds of leeches that should be large, medium and small, so that by cutting off the flow of blood quickly, as needed, and when it is first used, it is not medicine.
However, you do not use them to cut off blood from all over the body, and you only use them in carnous places, such as in the leg splints and in the knee joints, and in the arm splints, and in the breasts and belly and thighs, and resembling their carnous parts with humors.
And some of these instruments are made in the form of small scissors and cut according to this shape; by which the blood is cut when performed with phlebotomy or cutting a vein or artery.
And some of these instruments are made round according to this shape:
Chapter .xliii.
Of the treatment of male breasts, which are assembled from female breasts.
Some of these instruments are inflated the breasts of old men when they begin to lose hair on their heads, and then are deflated the breasts, and are assembled the breasts of women, and Roman poultices, large.
And whoever wishes this, consider cutting those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line B within the line G, and then cut off all the grossness, and then fill in the plague of incurable medicine, and then join together the two lips of the plague with stitchwork, and heal that which is within.
If the breast declines to the half-way mark and is softened by its magnitude when it comes to women, then cut it into two halves upside down, in the shape of a lunar figure, each half being contained within the other from within, until such time as the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line from B and the line from G. And then cut off the codena which is between the two lips of the plague, thus preventing the gurgling, and administer what is necessary to the cure within that it be healed.
And if you do not please the cutting of what it is covered in the inquietude of the plague, and by the flow of blood, then consider that you fill up the plague of incurable medicine by immersing it in corrosive water and let it rest within that which it corrodes, and then heal that which is within.
Chapter.xliv.
Of the perforation of pustules that come from below the teeth.
Those pustules that come from below the teeth are of the kinds of scrofulas and sores, which contain a pus.
And those which contain moisture are of some little kind; and those that contain moisture, cut according to this figure from a lunar section: from the line G to the line B. And when all is evacuated, what remains in the pustule is cured by the cure of the cough, and it is left for another day.
And then let the cough be left alone and be healed with a suitable enema, within that it be healed.
And if the pustule of the knots is, and of the scrofulas, then you cut them over there as we have said in the section about scrofulas as regards the cutting.
If the plague is spread out in such a way that it has a tendency to putrefy, then administer the cauterization according to what we have said before.
Chapter.xlix.
Of the perforation of pustules which happens through a vein or an artery.
When an artery is broken and the codena is consolidated which is over that, then motas appear of pustules: those being the signs by which it is recognized that inflammation and pustule are caused by an artery or a vein; for when a pustule is caused by an artery, it is long and aggregated in the artery's lumen; and that, when you feel the sound of the pustule with the teeth, you hear a hissing.
And that which is through a vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
And the section over this pustule is an error, and mostly in those that are on the left sides of the body, and in the thighs, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is a large one, so that its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the ends, or at the top, should be avoided.
However, over that which is caused by inflammation of the artery' s orifice, cut into the codena in the long section; and then open the section up to a hook, and release the arteries from within.
And then measure over that needle and let it penetrate into the other one, and join together the artery with a double knot in two places, — which causes you to feel the pulse in the extraction of two arteries which are on the temples.
And then puncture the place which is between two threads within that it cause all the blood to be gone, and let the pustule dissolve.
And then administer the cure by which is generated the pus, and let the threads fall within that they be cured; and heal that with a suitable enema, within that it be healed.
And if it is a pustule caused by a vein section, then consider that you have the hand near the pustule with your own hand, so that it is possible to make the needle pass through the place where you held it; and let it penetrate through the double knot, within that you extract the one from the other thread, and bind up the pustule with two threads according to what I have said before regarding the knot of the two parts.
If you fear that the thread will break, insert the needle first and then remove all the plasma, making a small incision with the needle first, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then dry the wound in its place within until it is completely healed, then cut off the excess of the thread, and leave what remains of it hanging.
Then place over it the palm that you have dipped in oil and ointment and apply the cure that is done with water and vinegar inside until it is healed.
Take away the wound that occurs because of twisting of nerves.
So that it happens in the artery and in the vein, and also it sometimes happens in nerves when they are struck or because of excessive work, and also for the following reasons:
And that it is placed in its place by the helpers or by the heel, or in any other place where the joints are irritated.
And it is a painful swelling that resembles the color of the other parts of the body, and it is in the largest ones of them that they are stiff because of the violence, and you feel a kind of stupor in them when you touch them.
And it is not a swelling that grows on the front of the body, and for this reason the thread remains, and it irrite all at once and does not grow in front or behind.
Therefore those who are irritated in the joints should not be treated with iron because it would strengthen the opposite part.
But those who are on the head or forehead, treat them with a sharp knife. If it is a small swelling, then treat it with a poultice and cut off the root of the swelling.
And if it is large, then treat it with ointment and cut off the root of it, and then stop up that part; and adjust the wound with stitches, and apply the cure inside until it is healed.
Here we continue.
Of section of a swelling that occurs on the lips or in the abdomen.
Then treat those men who have red spots in the belly and other parts of the body, with a similar treatment to that used for mushrooms, because their roots are fine and the head is thick; and also for those whose lips are swollen, and those who are small and fat.
You have already seen one, and in the belly there were two things that looked like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, with small roots.
And their lips were swollen and open, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Then you cut off those and sewed up the other in eighteen places. and the other had five inches.
And the operation of their incision is that you consider whether the patient's skin is moist, and the color of his flesh is white, moist, with small roots; then you cut them with a sharp knife, and if you feel any pain during the cutting, stop up that part with a poultice, and apply fire to it, because what is felt during the incision should be expelled without any problem; and if you notice any pain after applying heat, cauterize that area.
And if the patient is a little bit frightened and anxious, do not apply iron to cut them; but rather take fresh lead, and tighten the skin in the same way as it has been described, and leave it for two days.
Then tighten the lead thread; do not cut it, and let it remain in place until it is cured by itself because that work will be enough.
If the flesh is of thick roots, then there is no need to fear or worry during their incision, and more so in that part which is in the belly.
It might be possible for you to cut off most of it, and then stop up that part so that it does not grow back.
Then heal that wound so that the wound heals quickly.
And be careful not to cut off flesh that has a dark color, is of little feeling, and does not look healthy because it might be cancer.
I then remembered your words about the skull.
Here we continue.
Of treatment for umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia occurs for several reasons: either because of fissures in the navel that project outward, and from which the skin or membrane comes loose; or because of an excess of serous fluid that flows from a vein or artery depending on whether it is located in front or behind; or because air passes through a constricted vessel.
If it is due to fissures in the navel and to the protruding of the skin or membrane, then the color of the swelling resembles that of the body, and there is sharp pain and different sensations. If it is due to an overflow of fluid that flows from a vein or artery, then the part affected by this discharge should be observed, and it should not be hidden with cloth; and it should return when necessary, and there is great pain in its absence, and a strong desire arises as if to drink water, and violent work takes place.
If it is due to moisture, then it should not be hidden when you touch it with your hand, and it should not be constricted or crammed; and it should return when necessary.
If it is due to wind, then these signs appear: the swelling becomes darker and declines towards the left side.
If it is due to hunger, then the swelling is heavy, thick, and hard; and it increases according to a certain quantity.
If it is due to air passing through a constricted vessel, then touch should be avoided.
And the operation on it is that you consider whether the umbilical hernia is due to an artery or vein, or because of air passing through a constricted vessel; then you should refrain from treating it because in that part there is fear and anxiety as I have taught you in the chapter where I talked about swellings caused by arteries and veins.
If the umbilical hernia is due to an excess of fluid or skin, then you should order your servant to hold the patient upright, and remain standing; and then stop up that part with a sharp knife in the same way as it has been described, and extend the swelling in the same direction as the navel on top of the hip bone, and apply the knife edge around the navel in the same way as you have taught yourself; and then extend the swelling around the navel in the opposite direction on the back of the hip bone, and apply a sharp blade around it.
Then cut off the middle of the swelling that is extended on top of the navel and insert your hand inside; and if you notice any pain in the skin, then stop up that part with a sharp knife; and if you do not feel any pain, then extend the skin towards the navel with your hand, and bring the excess of fluid towards the back of the hip bone.
If the skin is broken because of fissures in the navel, then cut off a piece of it and insert your finger into that part; and if you notice a light glow in that place, do not tighten the skin or apply pressure to blood vessels; but rather apply a poultice.
If this is against your arceria or vein, then circle around that point and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two wires strongly and insert two needles into the circuit you have made around the swelling in a way like a ring, which should penetrate through; and then tighten the swelling in four parts on the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the swelling remain inside that it can stretch the meat and fall by itself; or cut it when it becomes thin and then heal what is covered with water inside that it should be healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is not of meat but of moisture, then cover what you have opened with a bandage so that it dries up and destroys the water, which it will suck up, and then heal what is covered by water and that consolidates the area.
Chapter 34.
Of the Treatment of Craniitis.
We have said, in the division, of the kinds of craniitis and in what way the treatment of it is with medicine, and that it is difficult for the treatment to succeed without causing ulcers; and we have said that craniitis is born in the most important and careful way for the cure of it.
And they said that some craniitis are in areas where the eradication of it is possible, namely when it is on the nipples or in the groin and similar to the limbs attached to remove all of it, especially when it is starting small.
But when it is old and large, do not cover it, because I cannot heal that wound nor have I ever seen it healed, nor has it come to water.
And the operation in it is when it is placed as we have said, that you go first and leave the patient and purge some of black cholera, and then heal what has been infected, if it is evident reflux.
And then prepare the patient for the operation, in which place is located for the operation, and then draw with a pointed awl those that are covered on it; and then cut from all sides with a smooth scythe so that no cause of its wounds remains. And let the blood flow, and do not wash that wound away, and squeeze the areas, and wipe off the gross blood with your hand or with the instrument you can get to it.
But if your hand is opposite to gross blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area so that the flow of blood stops, and then heal it with another treatment so that it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Of the Treatment of Hydropesis.
We have already recommended, in the division, of the kinds of hydropesis of water and the signs of each kind, of the treatment of it with medicine.
And that which is cured with iron is not but the kind of αλθίτισης alone, and it does not approach to cure the kind of tympanites nor the kind of hypostasis, because water is deadly.
And when you have already treated this kind of hydropesis tympanites with medicine and do not confer your medicine, then consider, for if the patient has already achieved a victory or is suffering from another type of hydropesis, such as coughing or abdominal pain resembling those, then keep in mind that you do not give it to treat with iron, because there is a danger about it.
But if you find the patient to be of robust virtue, and there is no other illness in him but hydropesis only, and neither child nor old man, then the way of the operation of it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the minister presses his abdomen towards the floor, forcing the water out through the opening of the penis, and then take a spittle according to this form:
it is of two sharp parts long, of the acute end with a spittle; but nevertheless it should be in a short time little by little, so that during the operation you do not enter into the budel, and that all these are done to him.
And then consider if the generation of hydropesis is from one side of the navel, for it is custom to cut off three fingers on each side, in the left part of it on the penis.
But if the generation of hydropesis is through illness of the genitals, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
And if the generation of it is through the self-abuse, then your section should be on the right side.
Do not cover that your section is on the rib on which you want to operate the patient so that the superfluity does not run into that area.
And then pierce with the instrument the whole of it, and then insert into that section, and raise your hand to the spittle between the cup and the syringe, and you squeeze it out; and if the quantity is a little less than a finger's width.
And then pierce the syringe so that it reaches the spittle to the desired location, and it is a place of water. And then squeeze it out and insert an instrument whose form is this one: It is like a silver tube subtile; it is made of silver or iron or lead, and which has at the end a small hole, and on the sides three holes: two in a row and one in the other row; and its end should be pointed according to the feather form, as thus:
And in the end of it should be strong, for when the instrument comes into contact with water, then let it pour out half a quantity of water, because if you pour out less than that, fortly hurts the patient by solving his spirit, or something happens to him that is approaching death.
But pour out that second quantity of the virtue of it, and according to what you think about the disposition of the patient's virtue and his goodness.
And then remove the instrument, and keep back the water which causes it because it is kept back by the rib that keeps back the hole that is on the syringe of which you have already been recommended to pierce according to this form.
And then repeat the instrument another day if the patient tolerates water, and pour out a small quantity of water, and keep it for some time on account of fear, and do not make an error so that it does not run with water but only a little bit.
But if you are afraid of the patient, and let a great quantity of water flow, then heal it in the sand, and bathe it, and wait for a long time; and heal it with desiccating medicines so that it is healed.
And then cauterize over the stomach, and self-abuse and the flow of water are according to what I have told you that is preceded.
Chapter 50.
Of the Treatment of Children Who Have Urinary Incontinence.
Some of the children are born from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is a straight hole or is not in its place).
Therefore, cover with a piercing so that it is born with a small needle according to this form:
And then pause in the hole a small silver nail and bind it, and do so for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, he stands up and urinates; and then return him.
And if you don't hold back the urine that goes over the area, it is possible that the urine that goes there does not go away.
The one for whom the hole was made should be treated with lead clove, as I said before, for a few days until it is amplified.
The ones where the hole is not in its place should be treated, for this causes it, because the one who is born with the hole has his penis raised to his navel according to his nature, and so he cannot urinate into the bowels, until he raises the penis to his navel; and this does not happen, because the sperm does not come to the mother according to its right way, and it is a disease that causes pain.
And the way to perform it on him is that the patient be put on his back, and the head of his penis be taken from his left hand with a strong grip for the extraction, and cut off the head of the penis at the place of the perineum with an awl sharp or with a razor, so that the blood comes out, or you don't remove any part, so that the head of his penis looks like the head of the penis and the hole falls into its place according to what is covered.
And keep in mind that when you operate on the flux of blood, because it may happen to him; and stop him from bleeding, and heal the plague until he is healed.
Chapter LVI.
Of the white color that occurs in the foreskin of the penis and of corruption, blackness, and adhesions of the foreskin of the penis.
White spots may occur on the penis, and it is an eminence of flesh that is smooth.
And of that one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Not malignant, so you suspend with a small ointment and cut off that part until it is all gone; and then put on it, with the help of God, a little Egyptian ointment; and then put on him, heal him with the help of God in the day after tomorrow.
And if the white color is malignant, of a yellow color, then you should take care that you cut off his penis and remove its head with a razor.
If the white color is in the foreskin of the penis, and one part of the white color is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then take care that you do not cut off the foreskin before it is hard; and then treat the outside, because when you treat the outside without treating the inside first, it is not certain that it will not be infected.
And if blackness and corruption occur in the genitals and in the foreskin, then take care to cut off all that has already been blackened and is about to rot or has already rotted; and then line it with a solution of flour from milk of magnesia and of three parts of salt and one part of vinegar.
And then heal him with the other treatment until he is healed.
If there is blood flow from the penis, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
Because cauterizing rejuvenates two opposite conditions, namely blood flow from the penis and corruption when it is rotten.
And if the head of the penis is rotten and destroyed completely in the hour, then take care to insert a lead catheter into the meat of the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is present, and circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or an abscess) then scrape with a sharp blade until it is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
And if it is difficult to scrape carefully, then take care to scrape with a sharp blade at the base of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and then because the foreskin, when it is fine, is pierced by its subtlety carelessly.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp blade, which has already been moistened in water to prevent adhesion.
And then it is healed with vitriol within the day.
Chapter LVII.
Of the cleaning of children and of the treatment that occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for all kinds of plague: but since it is part of our operation and our will, and since it is particularly suited to children, we must assign this better operation and the lighter treatment to those who are lost and lead them to salvation.
I therefore say that the young people do not say circumcision for many of their free friends, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by experiment, which causes me to be afraid of most of the craftsmen and barbers who practice circumcision and cleansing with a needle; and they use an awl and cut with a scalpel.
And I have seen all these ways, and I do not find better cleansing with scissors, with an awl that is used in cleansing with a needle, because the rope of the foreskin has two covers, and the thread pulls it up, and it is forced to another cut, and it hurts surely. And the cleansing that is done by shaving, and which is done with a knife, which is used by barbers, is not secure for the incision of the end of the male member, because it goes deep into the flesh.
In the operation with a needle, surely you will harm and corrupt your own operation. And the rope of the child is short by nature, and white spots may occur in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen it.
More of the cleansing that is done with scissors and an awl, the goodness, experiment shows me, because the scissors are a proportional incision, so that the sharpness that comes from it is as such that if you press your hand with a sharp edge, and cut according to a comparison at a time; and then the compression of the rope around the penis completely, with which no mistake is made.
And the way of the first operation is that you put the child to lie down if he is a big one, but if he is a small one, that you do not let him stand, and then take off the rope from his penis completely the next day.
And then put joy on him in all this way, which is at your possible risk that he receives his intelligence. And then put him to stand between your two hands firmly prepared, and do not make it stand up; and hide the scissors in your hand or leave the little one, so that the child does not see those or anyone else's instruments.
And then put your hand on the penis of him and blow on the rope, and pull it up until it is completely cut off, and then cleanse him with water; and if any part of the foreskin remains, then cut it off.
The shape of the forceps for the mouth; this is the shape:
If the extremities are not broken and the others are broken so that there is no space in the claw and the length of the two sharp ends is equal to the length of two knuckles combined.
The mistake in the operation is that the internal thread completely breaks off; or, if it is only broken in part, you must cut it out.
Then when you have extended your hand to the knuckle in front of the opening of the place and cut it with an equal length;
And if you cannot hold it by your thumb, then remove it with a nail and cut it.
And if three days have passed, and it remains swollen, then remove the cautery with ease and cut off that which is prepared for you; and cut the second one as well.
And keep the tip of the wedge away from him, because it will not be good to him.
And so take care that the blood does not solidify the dust that we have discussed in the treatise on dust.
And if the thread is cut off with an excess, and you follow the rule of the second, it will not be felt.
And take care that blood does not enter where we said to heal.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by pressure or pain or some congestion, or foul water or polluted food, and similar things to those that we have said regarding the methods of treatment in the division on urinary diseases.
And if the urine is not dissolved by water that we have mentioned, the cause being in the patient, then when the instrument is prepared as described above; this is its shape: it should be made of silver and fine lead, with a long tube similar to a palm and half, and at its end a thin tube in the shape of an axe.
And the method of inserting the urine through it is that you hold the bag doubled and lie on the outer edge of the loins or hips with good hold; then introduce the ends of the bag into the opening of the tube, and cut them off with the scissors if there is any excess cause of the skin, and then insert it into the tube with some force. And place the bag
Then set him down on the bed and wash his bladder and urine with warm water, and apply oil of olive and vinegar.
Then insert the tube with ease into the opening of the bladder; and double the bag over its edge from behind; then tie off that end tightly; then tie on the other end to the bladder, and do so with care, not severing it until you reach the part that is affected, and no further, unless the patient wants to go there himself.
Then take off the bag from the hip little by little, because urine makes the loins tight.
Then remove that and treat the urine with the tube; do not let it go until the bladder is empty, and relieve the patient completely.
Chapter LIX.
On the quality of bladder stones with a clamber and similar instruments that are in agreement regarding water.
When an ulcer or abscess develops in the bladder, or some injury is caused by a sharp object, and you want to distill water and medicine into it, then use the instrument called a clamber; this is its shape:
It should be closed at one end, but open at the other end. And in that there are three openings: two from one part and one from the other; so that when they are all filled together.
In the beginning it is a closed place, in which water is collected, and according to the quantity that is added to it, an addition is made; until when some cause causes the release of moisture from it, it is released with water, and when it is expelled far away, according to what the clamber has been made for, naphtha is applied in battles at sea.
Then when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, place the end of the clamber in the moisture, and throw it into the water that is forced out through the rear opening, because the moisture is thrown into the cavity of the clamber.
Then place the other end of the clamber in the tube according to what we have said regarding the tube; and then apply the moisture to water, because that moisture passes on to the bladder and is received by the patient.
The shape of the subtle clamber with which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its shape:
It should be made of silver or lead, the upper end being rounded, resembling a small feather, and the lower end being thin.
Then place the bladder in motion, and pause the moisture that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie that end tightly with a doubled bag, and heat the moisture over fire.
Then insert the other end of the clamber into the bladder.
Then hold your hand over the bladder with the moisture, and apply pressure on it until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; then remove the clamber.
And if you do not have a bladder, then you make a bag of sheep skin and cut it out in a circle; then pierce that completely around; then insert the faithful strongly into those openings, turning them as they are turned; then add the circle to it as it is added to the flesh, until you pause on the water that you want to collect from the moisture, and pour oil and water on it.
Then you hold that end of the instrument and do as we have said regarding the bladder, and express it until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LXI.
On the removal of urine.
We have already discussed in the division the different kinds of urine and the treatment of urine with medicine, and the distinction between urine produced in the lungs and that produced in the bladder, and the signs of each one.
We have also discussed urine that is produced by the cat's operation with care, and its section.
Urine produced in the bladder itself is that which is retained in the bladder.
And these are described in manifest and abbreviated form.
Then I say that urine produced in the bladder is most often found in children; and the signs of it are that the urine passed from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in a film; then the patient's belly rubs itself, and there are spots of vision, and it is passed like fire.
And it is a cure for children in the bladder up to twelve years old; and it is difficult treatment in the elderly. The younger ones are half-witted because they are between those.
And of that for which the danger is greater and the cure lighter; And if it is little, it is opposite to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, let us begin at the beginning of that which we are about to describe to you concerning the malady: for it is necessary to remove all the wound from the intestines; because that wound prevents the danger of the disease by means of an investigation.
Then bring the malady to their feet and place it on the pelvis and massage it with oil so that the disease does not enter into the prostate gland or some other place.
Then place the knife between your hands, and the servant places his hand on his legs, so that the entire bladder is lowered to where the legs are separated.
Then take it out and throw it all away.
Therefore, if you feel the pain in that space, immediately place yourself on your side and massage it with oil.
And if the pain does not go away with the oil treatment alone, then when you have untied him completely and oiled him from top to bottom, enter him into his anus. Then remove the disease from within that space. And turn it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your hand and expel that small amount outside the area where you have cut it open.
And order the minister to press his hand on his bladder; and order another minister, on his right hand, to extend his genitals to the legs, and on his left hand to massage the hernia where the genitals are separated, from the area where you have made the incision.
Then enter a small spike into this invisible place, and this is how it is done. And cut it in half between the anus and the genitals, not in your midsection, as if it were a small amount of disease that might have entered you; and if there is more, do not worry about it, because it will be cut out easily by means of a small incision. And so the incision is made on both sides, leaving some space between the incision and the anus or genitals, so that the disease does not escape through this opening.
And you should know that there is no place for which the incision is difficult because of the disease.
And this liquid is like a lion with a horn; it is round, and its incision is lighter.
Then if that is the case, cut it out of the opening.
And if that is not the way to cut it out, then when you are holding it with your hand or with a strap around your neck, press it strongly on it with a sharp-edged tool; and do not let it escape from your hand. Or enter a sharp instrument into its extreme end.
Or if you cannot hold it, then make a small hole in it and, if there is any flow of blood, cut off that part with vinegar seasoned with salt.
Or if the disease is more than two, at the beginning of your speech, press your hand on the opening of the bladder and cut it out; then press a little water towards that place, and if it is very hot, do not worry about it.
And if it is very large disease, then ignore that you cut it out with a great incision, for this happens to the malady due to two causes: or because of old age, or because it has come into contact with its continuous urine distilation, since the place is not completely solid.
Or minister expel it from within that is outside that will be lost; or enter a small portion of it with tweezers into the fracture and remove it in pieces.
Then when you have finished your operation, fill the wound with fresh aloe juice and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. Then place a clean cloth over it, oiled with rosewater or oil and water rubbed together, so that the blisters are soft.
Then return the malady to its neck and do not remove the bandage for three days.
Then when you have taken off the bandage, dip that place in water and oil, and cure it with a little chamomile and a little diazotic, within which is healing.
Or if the wound has blisters that are dry, it is like freezing the bladder and its exit is blocked by urine, which causes the bladder to rot and decay; then enter the small amount of disease into the blister, for if it remains there, it will not affect the bladder or its exit.
Then wash the wound with rosewater, water and salt, and in opposition to all kinds of diseases, with water that is suitable for washing out the disease within so that it may be cured.
Then in the hours of all the cure that you have described and placed the medicines which are applied to the area.
And if the disease is small and is in the middle of the penis, and it is stuck there, and the urine is blocked, then cure that with water which I told you before; because there are twelve places for this disease to appear: first, in the tip of the penis, which can be cured by means of a sharp instrument; second, at the base; third, on either side; fourth, below the testicles; fifth, above the scrotum; sixth, between the testicles and anus; seventh, around the anus; eighth, between the anus and genitals; ninth, in the middle of the testicles; tenth, behind the testicles; eleventh, on either side of the spine; twelfth, in the pubic area. So you should know which of these places is affected by disease; then use this treatment:
A triangle-shaped point, held, fixed at the tip.
Then cut it firmly and tie it with a knot behind that area so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then enter the sharp instrument into the penis, piercing easily into that disease. Then roll the sharp instrument in your hand over that small disease, and you will pierce it with ease into that disease; and if it is very hot urine, do not worry about it.
Then place your hand on that portion of the penis which is separated from the anus, for that area is round and it is blocked by urine; and if the disease is cured, it will be cured completely.
Or if this treatment is not suitable for you because of some cause which prevents that disease, then cut it off from the penis, and another one on the other side. Then cut it out of that portion of the penis between two knots. Then remove it. Then take off the bandage and wash the blister with cold water, which will be cured in that wound.
It is not necessary to tie it tightly from the penis so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other one from above so that, when tied, it does not cause pain; for when the knot is removed from the penis, the hernia returns to its place and hurts that area.
It is necessary for you to lift the hernia to the legs, or to lower it again, and that area will be cured without any pain; and if the disease returns, it will be cured with water and oil.
I understand that I have finished reading.
Of extraction of disease from women's blisters.
Disease in women is rare.
Or if you have any disease that is mentioned here, then the cure for it is difficult and requires unusual methods.
One of them is because the woman is very heavy.
And the second is that you don't know whether a woman is pregnant or not, as she lies down on the bed when she's pregnant, or among married women.
And the third is that you don't know whether a woman is knowledgeable about this art, mostly surgery.
And the fourth is that the location of the section over the penis in women is far from the location of the penis, so it would be difficult to perform an operation without pain, and in that case fear arises.
Maybe if necessity forces you to do so, then know that you take a pregnant woman, and rarely is it done.
Maybe if you are deprived of that, then know that you take a good-looking woman, or a married woman who is well-known in the act of women, or a woman who specializes in this art.
Then present that one, and order them to do whatever you send them, from the inquiry about the penis to the beginning; which causes them to look if the woman is pregnant, then know that they put their finger in her vagina and feel the penis.
So if she is taken, remove that one from him, and then order them to cut on that one.
Maybe if she is not pregnant, then order the married woman to put her finger in the patient's crotch and feel the penis, as she keeps her left hand over the bladder, and carefully touches that one.
So if she is taken, then know that gradually she stretches that one from the orifice of the bladder to the roots of her pubic hair, and carefully brings that one to the patient's anus.
And then cut on that position of the patient' crotch, with the base of the penis facing towards her anus, and carefully insert the penis into that opening, and don't remove it from there until the patient comes; and his finger should not leave the orifice.
The section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the finger into that section, and if she feels the penis, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know the penis goes inside her.
And you know that the types of penis are many: some are small and big, and some are sharp and pointed, and some have bumps.
So then you know how many types there are for the penis that you want to make a section on.
And if you want to stop the bleeding, adjust in that virulent spot and touch that one for an hour until it stops; then return to your operation before the penis comes out.
Prepare those instruments that are described in the extract of the penis in men, so that you are helped by them in your operation.
And if you want to stop the bleeding, and you know that the exit of the blood is from the arnica that is inserted, then you pause powder on that spot and spray it with a strong spray and do not repeat that one; and leave the penis alone, and don'y extract that one, because a very heavy woman will die. Then heal the plague.
So when the acute pain subsides, the area softens, then return to your operation before the penis comes out.
Chapter 62.
On Section on Hernias.
Hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the cicatum white, which leaves the testicles of the genitals containing the sperm, and it is called spermatic cord.
And some are inside the natural panniculus that prepares nature at the base of the sperm, before it becomes another testis; and it is the spermatic cord between the cicatum white that we have mentioned, and it is not water but fat.
And the cause of this hernia is due to the injury that occurs to the genitals, so that this substance is discharged, and sometimes it happens due to trauma caused by an impact on the genitals.
And this moisture is not of different colors, because the color of it or it declines to yellow or blood, or red, or black, or ripe, or white water, and it is that which is most.
And the landmarks by which you can identify where this accumulation of water is: because if it is in the cicatum white that we have mentioned, then the swelling is rounded, declining a little in length like a testis, and appears the genitals, because the moisture contains all parts.
If the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the swelling is at the base of the sperm, and thus one estimates that it is another testis.
If the moisture is between the spermatic cord and the cicatum white, then know that… (the text continues, but the sentence doesn't make sense in English).
And if you want to know the color of the moisture in the swelling due to the shape of the injury; and according to the water that is discharged in the edge of the injury, judge from that which is inside it.
So when we come to the cure of it, then know that you order the patient to drink if water is possible for him, and wash his feet.
And then let them lie on their back on a bed for a little while, and remove those sheets.
And then set yourself to the left of him, and order the minister to follow on the right side of him, who will extend his arm to one of two places at the base of the testis, and to the opening of the miraculous navel.
And then take a knife and cut the spermatic cord along its length until it reaches the penis.
And do the section according to a rectangular distance from the line that you should follow when cutting the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the cicatum white completely.
And remove that one, and observe, and keep for such an injury; and your removal of it from the base of the sperm as it is suspended on the testis more finely and carefully examine the removal according to the quantity that you can.
Then pierce the cicatum completely with water through a large piercing, and drain all the water out.
Then separate the two sides of the section by a nail, and extend the cicatum from its roots; and do not touch the spermatic cord that encompasses the genitals, and cut the cicatum in the manner that you can. And cut that one in its entirety or in parts, and especially the lower part, because if you don'y examine it carefully, the water won'y return.
Maybe if the testis is removed from that one far from its cord in the hour of your operation, when you have completed the section of the cicatum, then return that one inside, and then adjust the two sides of the spermatic cord with a suturing, and then heal those other plagues, until it is healed.
And if you suspect the testis is corrupted by another plague, then know that you should adjust the vessels that are under the suspender, and remove that one, and then heal it with water that we have mentioned.
Maybe if the water is aggregated into two parts, then know that there are two hernias; so cut that part according to what you have done in the other; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E then you shall wash the wound, and enter into the sections with wool immersed in oil or rose oil; and place another wool that you have immersed in wine and oil on top of them and spread out those over two genitals and the wonder of the womb; and open folded cloths and powders, and lay those open together with the thread which is according to this form:
Then you shall place two cloths and wool wadded according to this form; and the extremities of them should be pressed with a cloth or wadded wool, and they should be added together with the straining in the breeches of the breeches, and one of the extremities should come into the other, and the second should come from the split of the pantyhose, and two extremities upon two spaces left and two extremities upon two girdles, and all should be tightened in the breeches of the breeches.
And some are treated with the hernia by artificial cauterization in place of surgery; and it is that you take cauterization with a sharp knife and cut there the thread of the genitals, and it ignites according to what we have said within that is uncovered the white container containing water, and then you shall take cauterization according to this form: and it is put together in Greek letter.
And then pierces that container, and it ignites within that all the moisture be outside-sent.
And then extends the container with nails, and scrapes with nails, and scrapes with sharp cauterization; and scratch that according to what is possible within that you eradicate all of it; and keep yourself from the fire that the fire does not touch.
And you shall know that this operation is safer and farther away from the flow of blood, and better than surgery at section.
Maybe if you cause a swelling at the time of surgery or at the time of cauterization, or blood flow, it is then that you cure what causes a problem to you by means of this remedy which leads to it according to what is said.
Maybe if the patient is a bit poor, and does not hope for the second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation according to what I have said there; and it is when it is proven true by means of that water which we have said about signs, that this hernia is watery.
And then it is said that you shall operate the patient upon some raised table, and pierce the swelling in the lower part of it with a blade, and place the piercing according to the length of the body.
and then be the wide opening within that runs all the water.
And then place over the area cloth and leave it, so that it runs the content of the water. And then this remedy cures the area within that the plague is healed.
Maybe if contrariety is to the egression of water in that hour you pierce: and water does not come out but by means of that the white pannicle within the orifice of the plague causes contrariety and prohibits the flow of water, then it is said that you introduce into the plague a penalty or instrument from which water comes out; or adapt in the opposition of the plague a small one.
And you shall know that water returns, and is gathered after months or years; and when it is added, then pierce according to that method, for the patient will spend his days then.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Of Section on Fatty Hernias and Their Cure.
You shall know that in section on this hernia is feared to cause harm in the major cases; but it seems to me that the dismissal of it and being saved by that is better.
And I am reminding you of the operation on that one and the spices of swellings.
Therefore, I say that the swelling is born in the bodies of those whose genitals are joined and it is made by other causes: or for acute excess of moisture which is spread in the genitals, or for impact.
And it is the color of swelling according to the color of the body, and does not turn pale in pain, and is a heavy swelling.
And there is a swollen lipped swelling, whose color is dark, and does not feel to the touch.
And some are made by pressure of the bowels, and by inflation of those as well; so that the reminder of it is perceived, or by inflammation of veins.
Maybe water that is made by pressure of the bowels is recognized by the spreading out of swelling when you squeeze it with your fingers, and does not seem to be touched by you.
Maybe water that is made by inflammation of veins is not spread out by it any cause; because of the compression with your fingers.
And it is possible that on this species be made surgery and on the others flesh; and it is that you scratch the thread of the genitals, and then bring up the water from the parts, and undo those hanging down vessels, and tie them, and scratch those hanging down vessels further than those which you have brought up; and scratch those more than those which you have brought up.
Therefore, if the water is already consolidated on that flesh, then it is said that you extract the water and scratch that one.
And if there is adherence within any cause of the container, or between that which is between the veins, then it is said that you undo all that adhesion and scratch that by round incision.
Maybe if there is birth of flesh in the place of the adherence which is behind, then it is said that you scratch all that belongs to him; and extract the water as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the plague with sheep infused with rose oil and wine; and then this remedy cures that one within that another cure is applied.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the Cure of Fatty Hernias, which are of the blood.
It is seen that swelling wrapped in some wrapping like a bud of the testicles, and it is made difficult exercise and walking over the patient's body.
And in the cure of this disease is feared by means of that water from which remembrance is preceded.
However, it is said that surgery is performed on that one as well; because it is said to make the first.
And I say that you shall operate the patient upon some raised table; and then bring up the hanging down vessels to the parts which are being broken by the wheel; and keep those other servants of yours, and extend those to the wide part.
And then you shall scratch with a sharp blade by section across the right of the hanging down vessels within that they are the uncovered vessels.
And then scrape all from the beginning as well as I have said in the removal of the bowels which are in the tempers.
And then place in those one needle which is double-headed, and place that at the beginning of the places in which it occurs; and place another one opposite to that one at the end of them. And then scratch those in the middle place by section on the right according to the length of the body, and bring out that which is added to the noxious and corrupted moist.
And then this remedy cures the plague by the cure of other plagues in which you wish to heal being born; for it is not bad by means of that water from which the hanging down vessels are split into two genitals, because it is not good by means of that water.
If it happens that all the veins are closed, consider whether the testicles have been removed or if the blood vessels to them have been cut off, by which means they would be deprived of all nourishment and be made withered and incapable of producing, or because they might not become fully developed.
Chapter .lxxxv.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to the incision which extends over the abdomen from the navel, and thus, if a bundle of intestines should be found hanging down on that side, it is to be laid aside with those of the other bundle.
And this rupture is either of the ciphac or of protrusion, and it happens for two kinds of reasons: either by percussion, or by a loud noise, or by a sudden movement, or by some other heavy cause, or by an apparent reason.
And the sign of this is that it occurs slowly over a long period of time and not suddenly, and that it is accompanied by swelling inside the hernia sac before the bowel protrudes.
And the sign of this is when it occurs due to an incision in the ciphac, for at the beginning a violent pain suddenly develops; and that it is accompanied by a swelling near the navel, and that the bowel comes out slowly, and the flesh over it separates from the navel.
In some cases the intestinal sack is torn away from the bowel, and this is called an intestinal hernia of the inguinal region.
In some cases the hernia becomes swollen, and in others it grows larger when pressure is applied; and sometimes a painful condition develops and increases when pressure is exerted.
And in the treatment of these various kinds of disease, great care must be taken, so that the cure does not make the condition worse.
And the manner of performing that operation is that you command the patient to return his intestine to its cavity if it does not go of its own accord; and that a cushion be placed under his chest between your hands, and his legs raised.
And then put the thread around the scrotum at its top, and cut it through both sides; and then place the two ends of the cut thread between your fingers, one above the other, as you would to tie a knot.
And if the incision is according to the quantity that you can obtain from it, so that the bowel is torn away from it.
And then take off that portion of the ciphac which is left after cutting the scrotum; and that you may see the white, hard ciphac clearly on either side.
Then you should cut through the testicle in that place where the ciphac is white; and leave the thread at the top of the testicle, and cut off that portion which is attached to the hernia on either side, and then free the adherent part from behind the hernia.
And then place the thread around the scrotum on either side, and stretch out the white ciphac before you to its left, and raise the testicle to the ciphac at the incision; and command the minister to extend that testicle above it, and you will dissolve the adherent part behind.
And search with your fingers whether there is any cause for the bowel to be wrapped in the white ciphac; and that you may see if it has become tightly wound up. If you find any cause for this, then you should place it upside down before your abdomen.
And then cut through the scrotum at that place where you have bound the thread, and bind it tightly as you would a knot; and thus continue with the treatment which we have described above.
And then administer the oil immersed in water, and pour it over; and administer the thread which we have described above (and sometimes the white ciphac is cauterized, which we have mentioned above, because sudden movements may occur due to a flow of blood); and let the thread fall where it will.
If the patient's condition remains unchanged, then water should be added to it; and let it settle on that place where you have bound the thread as it has fallen.
And this is how you treat the wound with the other treatment of wounds, within which it is healed.
Chapter .lxxvi.
On Ventilated Hernia.
In this type of hernia, it is not seen that anything has been burned by the treatment described above to make it well.
And the first people said that it is done in the same way as we have described in the treatment of the hernia; which is to lay the intestines out in the open place on that side with ease; and then dry them in their place, because they fall when a cold humor is applied.
And treat the wound as we have described above, until it is healed.
Chapter .lxxvii.
On the difficulty which occurs in the intestines.
And sometimes the rupture occurs in the intestines as we have said above, and the place is removed.
And do not allow any cause of the intestines to be allowed at the genitals; and if one is allowed, it is little; and return when needed.
If the time is prolonged with water, it causes a small fissure in the ciphac, and then the intestine is placed within it; and this is how the rupture occurs in the ciphac as we have described above, and this is caused by the ciphac being spread out, and the place becomes swollen and oozes.
And the care for him is to do the cauterization as it is preceded by the narration of him.
Some are cured by pressing according to this method: and it is that the patient rubs his two knees between your legs, and you dry up the place of the rupture of the hernia by cutting along its length according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tighten the white rope that is under the cord until it is uncovered.
And then take the string and place it over the edge of the hernia, and press it onto the patient's abdomen.
Then cut the two places that are on the edge of the string of the hernia, and adjust one stitch to the other.
Then cut off the edge of the string, and do not pierce the hernia entirely, nor spread out the perineum in any way, or otherwise let me know about the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
And that is cured with the cure of the blisters, and when you pierce the blisters, clean them up, and restore the blister in place before it hardens; for the hernia rope is contracted and the eminence of rupture is not adjusted.
The cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Chapter .lxviii.
Of Softening of the Testicles
In certain men the testes are softened by water, because the flesh between them is softened, and care must be taken.
Then, it is necessary for him who is treated that he lie down according to his two knees, and spread out all the rope which is softened over the natural rope; and then let him adjust two lips to the stitch.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened rope with three or four cuts and a firm stitch.
Then pierce between the stitches, and cure for the treatment of other blisters in place before they harden, and let the blisters fall off.
Chapter .lxxxii.
Of Castration.
You should know that castration in our law is prohibited, more so because I remind myself of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except by two methods, the first being that so that this is in the science of the doctor when he is questioned about it, which knows the cure for it when it happens; and the other method is that we have had the need for castration of other animals for our benefit from them, namely, from donkeys, and horses, and pigs, and animals similar to them.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting off the testicles, or by making a cut and opening up to the inside.
More so in that which is done by cutting off, the way of the operation is that you make a cut in the water tail of the animal until the genitals are soft and limp and hanging down. Then take them by your hand within that they remain relaxed and do not appear to be loose from the touch.
More so in castration by making a cut and opening up, cover that you have the animal and press the rope of the testicles of him with your left hand.
Then take the suspenders, and pierce them on each side with one cut within that two cuts process.
Then pierce those further that you may want to remove. And do not let fall onto those of the rope for any reason, but rather the subtle rope which is over the veins.
This method of castration is better done by cutting off, because cutting off strengthens the loins so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
Then the blister is cured before it hardens.
Chapter.lxxx.
Of Hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two methods: the first is that it appears as it does not have space in the rope of the testicles, being between two testes figure like a woman's cunt because of the pubic hair.
Some of that man's urine is on the rope of the testicles.
In women there is another kind: and it is that the woman's cunt over the penis is like two testes of man a little bit all together at the beginning of their foreskin, as well as two testes of man.
The cure is of three kinds: of the two men and of one kind of women. And it is that you pierce those flesh according to the shape of those, so that it removes the odor of her; and then let them be cured with the cure for the treatment of other blisters.
And in the second kind of men whose urine is on the rope of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter.lxi.
Of the treatment of warts and of the flesh that is prominent for the reasons of women.
A strong wart is adjusted onto natural causes within that it hardens and stops the treatment; and some women are enlarged in some women to such an extent that they break out into laughter as well as in men, and spread out until coming to coitus.
Then take the excess of warts with your hand or with a needle and pierce them.
Do not end in incision, mostly on the head of the penis, lest it cause bleeding from the blood vessels.
Then that is cured with the cure for the treatment of blisters before they harden.
More so, naked meat is meat that grows in the belly of the mother within it, and it hardens very much so that it does not break out until it has the shape of a cow's tail (and I call it here "bad cow's meat"); then we pierce those according to what we pierce with warts, and cure those before they harden.
Chapter.lxxxii.
Of the cure for warts and of prominent flesh for natural reasons.
Allergic is that the woman's cunt is not pierced, or it is a small piercing. It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is by bad meat which preceded it, and that is done or by naked meat that is adjusted or by subtle rope or hard.
It is done or in the mother' head, or on her sides, or on the top part of her, or on the bottom part of her, and it prohibits touching and impregnating and having children, and very much it prohibits bleeding.
The knowledge of that is done by looking at the moon, if the opposite is apparent, probably; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the help of a mirror or a string.
More so if the opposite is by subtle rope, and it is closer to the two lips, then you pierce that with a needle or a string.
And it is that you pause on the two lips' powder, and then pause the thread of the needle or the string of both sides before you pierce them.
The woman is on her two knees, with her legs spread out, and then she extends the two lips by force before that subtle rope of the hernia is broken and the opposite is apparent.
And take wool and send it in oil and place it on that spot, and rub the man with it each day so that the wound does not close up.
If the scar is thick and thick, then cover that with a sponge of lime or a leaf of mint.
If the obstruction is by flesh, then suspend it in oil, and scar it.
And if the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds are effective, then apply them with honey.
Then administer a wide, brass syringe so that the plague does not close up quickly.
And hold it for several days and administer ale of lemon.
Then let it be treated with the other treatment for consolidation so that it is healed.
And sometimes, in the greater birth of other animals, and then cover according to this method. If that is for hard lumps, and the hard lump in the greater birth is not opposed to being treated in some way.
Chapter .lxxiii.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red boil that happens in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids such as those of small veins that do not cause pain continuously; and if they are old hemorrhoids, then let them be.
And I have already said in the division the spices of those and their characteristics, and direct like that which receives treatment and that does not receive treatment.
So say that lumps and nodules when they are in the greater birth and do not appear to be felt, then no treatment is done with iron.
But those that are in the orifices of the greater birth above which there is a feeling, let them be treated.
And when you put the woman on her back and extend her legs with a cloth, or with a sharp knife, cut them off.
Then sprinkle over those the powder of a wound from one of the powders scar it with a knife, and similar to those.
Then dry their feet for an hour, then place them in boiling water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make a poultice with rice and mustard and similiar things.
Then take flour and make a paste with honey and vinegar, and put it on his feet.
And if the wound is healing, then do so; otherwise, attach them to two windows, and make a scarification of his nipples.
Then take wool and dip it in juice of coriander or of arnica or of grape, and attach it to the area; and cure the area with oil within that is healed.
Then heal that within that is healed.
Chapter .lxxiv.
Of piercing of the hernia in the greater birth.
Small lumps of hernia happen in the greater birth, such as small lumps and small boils and blisters and hernias and pustules and tails and other lumps. I have already said of these diseases and the characteristics of those and their treatments in the division.
And when I say in this treatise of hernia what is done to the hernia that heals, and if you want to know how the operation is performed.
Then consider if the pain of hernia in its beginning is acute with percussion and pus and fever, and sometimes that hardens over it; then do not cut into it, but treat it with oil that helps with maturity until the sharpness of the symptoms passes.
Then place the woman on a table that has two tables; and let her lie down with her back towards you, and extend her legs beyond her belly, and open her breasts wide, and pause her hands below her belly, and tie them together with a rope.
Then the midwife follows behind and gives the instrument with which she pierces the orifice of the greater birth, the form of which will be determined in those cases that she will decide to do so.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you must stand behind the woman's belly with your feet apart; and that into which the instrument enters is only the woman's belly and her evil humors. If the instrument is larger than the woman' belly, then place a powder over the texture of her belly so that it does not enter the belly with any instrument.
And when you pour the liquid that runs out of the instrument from behind and the midwife holds the instrument and mixes the liquid before it enters the orifice of the greater birth.
Then when you feel pain, and it is hot and wet, then cut off the top of it with a sharp knife.
Then when the swelling is evacuated, then place a cotton swab dipped in rosewater or green water in which there is no stiffness; and pause the caloric7 in the section of the belly.
Then wash the woman's back and chest with clean wool dipped in water in which are boiled purple flowers.
Then let it be cured by two days of applying a poultice with oil to the area; and then it is healed.
And sometimes the woman's back and breast are washed with water that has been boiled with honey, then dip in water in which long raisin or almond leaves have been boiled, and then return to the poultice.
If the swelling is inside the woman' belly, then do not administer this treatment with iron; instead, heal that with oil that I have said in the division.
Chapter .lxxv.
Teaching midwives how to make a poultice when they are sick according to the following shape: not natural.
Necessary cause is that the midwife should recognize in the beginning of natural childbearing by signs of her body, and it is that when you see the woman express herself to the sides apart and she wants to smell the air, and over it is covered with water that comes over her; and when she hears a sound from the baby, then know that this birth is the second shape of nature, and the first sound comes from his head, and the second is that he hangs or hangs on her navel.
Then when you see those signs, then know that the woman's belly is moving as if she were about to give birth; and let her lie on her side, and these extra movements are due to the child's head, and this is a sign of birth. And these extra movements are due to the child's head, and this is a sign of birth.
If this birth is different and not pleasant, because the child is lying on his back and his head is lying over his chest, and his mother's hand is over his head, then know that it is not a natural or pleasant birth; for example, when the baby is lying on its back and its head is over its chest, and its mother's hand is over its head, then know that it is not a natural or pleasant birth. Or it is that the head of the child and the mother' hand are not over his chest, but his mother's hand is over his belly, and suddenly a great sound comes from him; then know that this birth is not pleasant or natural; for example, when the baby is lying on its back and suddenly a loud noise comes from him.
For necessary reason it is for the midwife to be skilled and subtle in all matters, and that she guards against mistake and delusion.
And I am showing the whole figure of those, and what genius is in those so that it means for this and is standing on it.
When it comes out over his head by natural force, and that is violent on the woman and is put in a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of it already exhausted, then make that seze, or that women have him, and evaporate his con with fennel seeds and with oil humitz.
Then the midwife enters between his small testicles and splits it with him the second, or cut it with her finger within that it comes that is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly within that it sends the fetus.
Maybe if it does not send, then cover that the woman is cri-ti-rized of mucilaginous of fennel and of mucilaginous of fennel in cotton.
Then command him, then the cri-ti-rized one, that it is compr-mued and make that she stornuda with condition; and to his mouth and his nose for an hour, because the fetus soon gets there.
And if the two more of the fetus are soon get there at the beginning, then cover that you reduce those with facil-ity little by little. Maybe if it does not obey the instrument, then pause the woman over a table and lift her feet up, and then concuse the table on the earth; and the woman is held that she does not fall down the concussion.
And if the two more are not turned in and die the fetus, then incise those and extract the fetus or tie his neck with a rope and extract it with equality, because that one soon gets there.
When the fetus is on its feet, then cover that you push those in them, and then make that the fetus is small, and then make that it engulfs itself, and then make that you take a foot of it and extend those little by little.
Maybe if it is already come into the space, then you command him that he presses, and make that she stornuda with condition, because soon gets there if God wills it.
And if it is not soon get there at the water that you have described, then return the fetus little by little until you pause the second natural figure, because that one soon gets there if it is taken in the water at all.
And if it is forbidden at all the water that you have described, then take of fennel seed and of gum dissolved, and hit all in the mortar for good percussion, and then line-y it to the water of the woman, the most down of the belly of him. Then make that she makes a cut in the water tebez, within that she succeeds the hiccup.
And when the partings of him are lessened, then make sub-fumigation to him of mint and sub-pause that to him. And when sub-fumigation for an hour, then you make that she is seze over a table, and then make that she stornuda and extract his mouth, and remove it from there, and press the second part less of the belly of him with light pressure, because the fetus soon gets there.
Extraction of the fetus latutin-dimentially depending on one of its mass. Is made to reduce the mother's hand, maybe if it cannot do that, then raise the woman and make her go up.
And if go up is not possible, then make that she rests on the ground, and make those of her concuss with violent motion, and then administer with care the things that you have described of mucilaginous substances.
And if it is come the childbearing, then make that she is seze over a table, and then study on the reduction of the mother's hand, and engulf the fetus second natural figure, and make that the woman stornuda and command him that he presses to itself within that it is soon get there.
Extraction of the fetus over its head expanded its mass and the sole of his foot is placed on two of his mother's. Then make that the midwife has the hand of the fetus and then roll it little by little, and do with ease.
And when is not yet engulfed, then pause on the water that you have described of oil and of mucilaginous substances.
Then command him that he presses little by little, and when the water is made, then make that she makes a cut over a table and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command him that he presses with care; and make that she stornuda with condition. Exit of the fetus is prepared on the side.
When it goes out to the horrifying of the mother second in this way, then consider, and you make the second one with your finger within that it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and the head of him, then consider that of the embryo, so that it is not retained and is safe.
Then make the fetus to the partings within that you pause the second one, and then command the woman that she presses herself a few times, and he is soon get there if God wills it.
Exit of twins or of many fetuses. Know that twins are rare, and sometimes three or four, but at the water is strange and difficult to recognize; maybe there are natural causes, and not alive.
And count those, even if they are multiplied, a second one, and are separated by the cord, distinguishing between them in the navel of each one; and some vegus are soon get there thus, as it is already come into the world naturally, and others are soon get there if God wills it.
And if they are difficult to understand their devises the childbearing and reach water that I have described of non-natural figures, then you take care of them thus, as I have described it.
And if the midwife is subtle and gentle water that makes with ease and subtlety, and with lateness, and is made to be subtle according to all figures as it is prepared with care for the good of the soul.
Remember that he who was formed in the womb from embryos and Aborted are.
Some veals are made in the mother one, two, three, four, V and VI, VII and VIII; X and already it is to be verified that a woman gets pregnant VI and another X for all formats, which causes fo made by measurement of the glorious wise men.
And also cover that it is in the science of midwives because it is very light at that little-seeming water, and therefore stop doing it to that water with a view to covering it.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus with water that we have mentioned in the division of medicine, and it does not come out by itself, then you must necessarily use surgery to extract it, provided that you consider whether the woman is of good health or not affected by any accidents for which it would be a needless loss.
Then return the patient to her side on her back, and have her head bent forward, and the space between her thighs raised up.
And the minister should hold that of two parts or be tied in the side for so that the body does not spread out too much during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mother's mouth with olive oil and with a mixture of althaea and fenugrec and with a scent of lavender.
Then the midwife should put the oil and mixture on her hand, and then make herself comfortable in the mother' side, and then feel with her hand for the position of the fetus' heels.
And place it in a convenient position: then consider whether the fetus is ready to come out, and let it fall on her head, or let you hold its heels in the hollows of her back, or in her neck, or in her mouth, or on her palate, or leave it to grow on her beard, or to her collarbones.
Or if the delivery is over her feet, then in the petticoat, or in the middle of her sides.
And she should hold the heel with her right hand, and place its curvature in that position between the fingers of her left hand, and then make herself comfortable and place the heel in one of those positions that we have mentioned, unless it reaches the cause of the delivery.
Then place and hold another heel in that position, or the third if necessary, so that it does not slip out, but is held fast, and not extended except by its own power.
And so that the relief of it is complete from the very beginning, so that the removal of it brings ease when it comes out at its own time during labor.
And in the water that the removal is softened; and if any part of it is held back, then consider that the midwife should moisten herself with oil as we have said before, and then make herself comfortable in the water that has been retained.
Then if the fetus is taken out whole, then the heels should be switched places between the positions that we have mentioned before it is completely removed.
Or if the mother's back is turned toward the other one, and it is not possible to reduce that part by the curvature of her spine, then consider that it should be wrapped around that; and then extract it before all of it comes out, and mark it or cut it in the joint of the spine or in the thigh.
And so consider that you pass into the other side, and on the two feet.
Or if the fetus' head is large, or it comes out with the curvature of the spine in the delivery, or is in the water that has been adjusted, then consider that you should enter between the fingers of the hand and open the head and extract the water, or break that one with a tool called "alundated", the shape of which will correspond to the shapes of the other tools in the chapter that follows this one.
And it seems that if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then consider that you should mark it with a needle, or take it with an alundated tool as we have said before; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is delivered and curved from the collarbones, then consider that it be cut in two parts so that the moisture that is on the feet is spread out.
Or if it is not complicated, and does not come out easily, then consider that you cut the head as soon as it is possible to extract it.
And if those left in the womb are post-mortem or are in the water, then consider that you should pierce it where the moisture is located in it.
Or if the fetus is over her feet, then its attraction is light and its direction to the mother' mouth is light.
Or if the fetus is curved from the belly, then consider that you extract it with a drape wrapped around your hand, and cut the belly in two parts so that the water that is located in them flows out.
Or if the other members are still standing and the head turns, then the midwife should make herself comfortable on her left side; or if the mother' mouth is open, then she should put herself into the position that we have mentioned before, and then feel with her hand for the position of the fetus' heels, and then hold them in its heel-hollows, or in the middle of its sides, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or leave them to grow on its beard, or to its collarbones.
And if the mother' mouth is closed because of apoplexy and it is caused by the water that we have mentioned before, then consider not to make much noise when you enter; and first administer an effusion of warm water. And then administer plasters; and follow the patient with warm water, which softens and moistens it.
And if the fetus is over her side, then consider, if possible, that it be cut; and water that we have mentioned before to the living fetus.
Then, if water is not possible, then cut it in pieces and extract it.
And she should leave no cause remaining within the second one.
Then when you have completed your surgery, then administer water that we have mentioned in the treatment of apoplexy and those other things that occur because of it from the mother.
And if it is a flow of blood, then deliver it into clear water and administer the other treatment.
You have already seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and another one that was pregnant again, and a dead fetus has come out of it. It happened to a woman that she had been pregnant for a long time because of apoplexy, and then she began to deliver a baby, and it was a big one, and it was getting out whole.
And you were called to treat her, and treated her for a long time, and the plague did not become solid.
Then you continued to treat him with some plasters of strong attraction, and extracted an arm from him, and then passed a few days later, and extracted another arm; and you were amazed that there was no bone in the womb.
And then you began to think that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Then you cured the plague, and extracted some bones from him, and that woman was in such a condition that it was a small arm.
And I did not consider myself strange for it, but because in water there is science and assistance for those who have been given medicine by the doctor.
From the forms of instruments that are necessary for extract the fet.
Shape of the device with which the mother is opened:
This is the shape of the strapping in which the free ends are folded together, where by folding there are two loops at the end of two strands. However this loop must be covered so that it is placed under the strapping, and that it is done with a needle or a stick of wood.
And be the length of each stick two times and half the margin of either one is a dit, and the length of either is one palm and half; and in the place of two sticks are two adjustments of that same sticks which are already closed, whose length is more than one palm and a little bit less, and the width of each is a dit, or a little less.
And these two additions are sutures in the mouth of the mother so that it is opened to those when you turn the two prescribed loops.
Another shape similar to that, but smaller and lighter:
Made of wood or stick according to the appearance of pliers. However at the end of them are two additions as well, and the length of these additions is a palm, and the width of each is two ditz.
And when you want to open the mother, then do so that she is lying on her back with her feet hanging, so that it opens between her thighs. Then open your hand with the device as you would with pliers according to the quantity that you want of the impression of the mouth of the mother within it does not matter that the measurement makes.
The shape of the strapping which they called the ancient ones:
Shape of the device with which it is propelled, that propels the fetus:
The shape of a screw that twists the head.
It is assembled to pliers whose ends are separated as shown in the form of a screw, sometimes also with teeth along its edge, and sometimes also with teeth on the opposite side, according to this form, sometimes also, and these teeth are cut as shown and engraved and twisted. The shape of little screws:
The shape of a simple spike:
The shape of two simple spikes:
The shape of a chisel with two ends, where the head is separated from the handle:
Two wide chisels:
All these instruments are prepared by the artisan, and when they are more numerous or less or more depending on the need of the doctor; it is necessary that the hands of the men be more agile for the work.
And you do not open these instruments now if it is unnecessary, because the need for them is not justified.
Of the extraction of the second one:
When the second is held back it must be commanded to the mother that she hold her breath, and then open your hand on the mouth of her and on her nose, and if by doing so it is forced out, it is good.
But if not, then take a ball and pierce the skin on top of the head, and break open its mouth with your fingers, and if necessary use a pinion to open it; and if necessary add an herb, and bind it with a bandage, and wet it with the water of Saint Gregory. All these herbs or some of them are immersed in the water of the ball, and set it on fire.
And then place a straw tube in the mouth of the mother, and keep that water which vaporizes inside the cavity of the mother.
And then make the second one blow away with a puff of wind, and it flies out.
If the curd does not separate, then command the mother to dip her left hand in olive oil or a mixture of thyme; and place that hand on the skin of the stomach, and introduce the second one that has been found, and when it is found again, take it out slowly little by little according to the rule that the mother does not feel any repulsion. Until then, the two are left in their place without difficulty.
And if the mouth of the mother is blocked, we have already described the treatment with a sneeze and with the water of Saint Gregory.
If the second one is not found with all the remedies that we have mentioned, then you must not force it out by force, but rather cover it with a cloth and rub it with oil and tar; because that will make it more difficult to be removed, and when it is found again, it can be dissolved with a solution of alum and it will fly out.
But when it is forced out, it will cause a loud noise to the head and stomach, and to the mother; and then place them under smoke and apply them according to their smell.
Some of the ancient medicines are already known as a smoke treatment for the nose and dried figs.
The shape of a device with which the woman is smoked, when it is necessary to control menstruation and the second one:
Made of glass or porcelain:
And the small end should be placed in the cavity and the wide end above the fire, and the smoke should rise from between its braids.
Then hold that medicine inside until it is consumed by smoke, and repeat.
Of the extraction of the child's bottom, which is not punctured:
The children's bottoms are not pierced; this must be done with care and a sharp instrument. Then command the mother to pierce the child's bottom with a sharp instrument; and if not, pierce it with a chisel, and be careful that it does not touch the liver.
And then place a burning thread over that bottom, and cover it with oil; and then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
If you fear that it will be burned, then place a straw tube in the child's mouth, and prevent it from breathing while it is burning.
And this causes the child's bottom to become infected with pus or a abscess; then when that infection has healed, it is treated with water which we have described in the treatment of pus and tar.
Of the treatment for the fistulas that they leave behind:
The fistulas that remain after the delivery of the child cause a painful swelling, and the grossness of the pus remains away from the bottom or in the space between one part of it; this must be treated with a poultice.
This is a fistula or a lump.
And with that swelling is aged and it dries up with white crusts or subtle rust, and some of those fistulas penetrate deeply.
And those that penetrate are recognized by the water that is discharged from them and by their windiness; and some people sometimes use the exit of a fire, and some others break it away with a hard blow.
And some of those fistulas sometimes pierce the space within the bladder, and into the meat of the pelvis; and some others penetrate inside the joint of the crotch.
And in that which is known as a fistula penetrating the anus and not penetrating it, then put your finger called the rectum in the anus, and try gently to push or pierce the fistula when it is not twisted.
But if in that there is a twist, then try gently to push or scrape the fistula with your finger called the rectum, until you feel the twist or hair on the finger.
And if you do not feel that at all nor make any type of passage of the bowels or worms or wind, then as I have said, know that it is non-penetrant, and put your hand on the cure.
And when the fistula enters into the bladder or deep into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is extremely urine from that and prohibition for it so that the area above it with medicine is hardened.
But if it enters into the joint of the thigh or deep into the bone and causes pain in the circuit of the testicles, then its meaning is that the attempt has entered here if it is not twisted within the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the exit; and that with time it is always damaged; and that it does not cure with that medicine, nor is hardened with poultice.
And in all those fistulas that penetrate there is no cure at all, and the cure of those is work and uselessness of the medical leaves on which they are sutured.
But in that which is non-penetrant and old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and that which I have already told you and tried.
And that is because the patient's legs are placed above his buttocks and lifted, the cushions are slanted towards his abdomen, and a gentle attempt is made to push or scrape with iron, or a sharp object if it is in the fistula, until you know the area where it enters.
And if that twists the patient' leg, then cover so that you do not enter your finger called the rectum into it.
But if you feel the attempt already in your finger called the rectum inside that it is twisting and also feel something between it and that fistula, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and do not work on that, for it is not in that cure, as we have said.
But however, some say that it heals in certain men.
And of the medicine by which it is hoped to heal it gently according to the width of the fistula, then put that fire gently on the fistula before it enters the anus; and repeat that two or three times within that you know that all those flesh that are adjusted with that fistula are like feathers of goose.
And that cure with poultices wrapped in cloth before all those flesh that are adjusted, and with medicine that engenders and hardens it, and if healed, then it is good; and if not, then it is not healed by any other cure.
But if the attempt enters and does not penetrate into the anus, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the attempt there is a slight piece of flesh or something, and the fistula goes where the surface of the flesh is cut, then dry the flesh from the beginning of the fistula, and see if it dries with the attempt, and if it enters into the fistula before the section reaches the place where it exits, then it is released and escaped through the attempt.
Then untangle those flesh that are adjusted with a tube of goose feather, and do not allow any cause to come from them.
But if there is a flow of blood between you and your work when you adjust those flesh, then the milk that is best and the instrument of pus is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts well: so it is adjusted from those flesh that are adjusted, and separates the three exsiccations from the moisture.
And that cure with poultices wrapped in cloth or wrapped three times before the place gets hot, and then cure the plague with hard poultices that generate and harden it.
And so medicines in which there is rigor and excision; when restored, then it is already healed and you do not fear iteration.
But if the fistula has already entered into the perineum of the anus and is elongated from its surface, then enter your finger called the rectum into the anus and feel it.
And therefore, if you feel the attempt and it is slightly of flesh or something between you and it, then it is close to penetration; so there is no work in it but trust and hope.
That cause is administered in it one of three ways: either to cauterize that already said; or to dry that within which you can reach the cavity so that it is possible for your finger to enter, and the appropriate cure; and do not cut with a section so that you do not injure the lacuna containing the anus, and that you access to the patient' back only because of your will; and then cure that with water already said because it fortifies well; or to elongate that slightly and make pus that dries that within which you can reach the cavity, as we have said, either with the attempt or with another instrument with an acute end, and then untangle those flesh that are adjusted within which you can reach the cavity, as we have said, either with the attempt or with another instrument with an acute end, and then try to restore all the plague with a section, and if the pus hole above it is not hardened, and the fistula is open at the exit of the anus, and allow that pus to flow out through the patient' back. And some times the fistula is finished according to this way: it is when you enter the attempt into the fistula, and it is on the buttocks' side towards the skin with the cloth, and in the margin of the buttocks, then make an attempt with an acute end, which is thus as a needle prepares the veins according to that form:
and enter into that poultice wrapped in three leaves or around it; and then enter your attempt into the fistula within which you can reach the cavity.
But if it is penetrating in the margin of the buttocks inside, then you take that poultice from there as far as you can enter your finger called the rectum into the anus; and take the end of the poultice and adjust both ends apart, and pull out one, and let it flow for a day or two, and when more times you insert the poultice into the flesh, then take it well between those flesh that are adjusted between the two ends of the poultice.
And then cure the plague within which is hardened and healed.
But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you prepare it, but not in the margin, because it is not to you that you let it flow so that you do not injure the anus; and then make it within which is healed.
The shape of a needle that divides the fistula: its curve is sharp and the other side is not, so as not to injure you who are not necessary; in times like these.
Of sutures of hemorrhoids where there runs blood in the incision of those.
Emorrhoids are as follows: either between the buttocks resembling grass that is of charcoal, or those are with grease. And those are so small and great, and that the blood runs from them all at once, and they are only a few drops, and outside the buttocks, and in its ends.
May be those who are hot in the buttocks according to the second of a little humidity, from which runs yellow or a little of blood continuously, and is according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is inside the buttocks, is that you command the mallet to rub and squeeze in between the buttocks until they hurt and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you cover yourself and hang on to nails or whatever you have in your nail, and approach those spots with their little roots.
If the nails do not have them in those because of the humidity of them and the softness of those, then take them with a rough cloth or with a piece of twine or with a piece of wool, and cut them at their roots, and approach them with sharp tweezers, and dust some fine powdered salt on them according to the incision, so that they are at those in place of cauterizing; or cauterize them according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing. And then cure those with the other cure before they are healed.
And if the buttocks do not obey to exit with ease, then rub the mallet with a small bite, and wash it with that water which is in the buttocks and which causes exit with ease when the mallet is rubbed.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is easy to cure, and it is because you take them with your nail, or with a needle, and cut them, and then cure them with that water which we have said is inside, so that they are cured.
And that which you cut, cover it with a silk cloth and put the needle through it and approach the hemorrhoids from above, and make the needle pass through the little roots of them, and wrap the two ends of the silk cloth around the tip of the needle, and draw it up; and then stretch the hemorrhoid strongly, and then loosen the silk cloth and extract the needle.
And make water on all of them, and leave one of them uncut, so that the excess blood from the main vein runs out of it.
And then place a cloth on the buttocks with rose oil or wax; and place that one on the buttocks and order the mallet to pause. And then leave it in place until it is completely healed; and when it falls down, cure those with oil or with another cure until they are healed.
And if those old ones do not heal with the medicine above mentioned and with your nail, then cut them with a sharp tool or with a spatum within so that they are moistened and fed by the pus from above, which prevents them from healing; and then cure those after they have healed.
Then you burn those with a strong fire so that the first one which appears is scalded, and then cure those after they are healed.
Know that it is necessary to cut it, and not otherwise, because it looks similar to a clove according to the color of the body, and it is spread throughout the whole body, especially in the feet and the toes, and by means of these you feel the pain of the main vessel.
And then cut it with a sharp tool or with a needle, and extract it from its root; and then cure that one.
And if you want, cauterize the second which is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing.
May be warts are small, hard, raised pustules on the surface of the body, and mottled spots appear in most children.
The cure for it is that you spread it and cut it, or that you stretch it and burn it. And if you want, cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine as we have said above.
May be fever is a small, hard, raised, or pustular lump on the skin, which appears in the palm of the hand, and when it is touched it feels hot to the touch.
The cure for it is that you take a pen of hen or of duck, and make it strong, and place it over the wart within its circumference, so that the circle of the pen contains the warts; then move your hand away from the pen, so that it cuts the blood supply to the wart, and then cut off the wart at its root.
And if you want, make water on the hen or duck pen according to this form:
May be the opening at the top of the pen should be slightly wider than the thickness of the paper, wrapped so that on the tip it is enclosed by it and then heated until it melts; and then rotate the pen.
And if you want, cauterize the wart according to what is said in the chapter of cauterizing.
Of the shape of the tools that are used to give the bite.
Some spots are cured with silver or lead or melted wax or hammered bronze; and some spots are cured with small tools, because the one that is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and of those which are administered in the cure of painful or unpleasant things, the cure should be small.
The shape of the large cure is small and the shape of the small cure is small.
The top of the pen should be wide enough to accommodate the tip, and the distance between the tip and where it is attached should be determined by this.
And the tip of the pen should be slightly wider than the thickness of the paper and smaller on one side than on the other; and it should be determined by how thin or thick the paper is.
And the bag in which the medicine of animal bladder or sheep's wool is placed should be wide enough and its root should be a palm.
And it should be pierced by sharp tools as it is rotated, and if the distance between the grooves is determined by how thick or thin the paper is.
And then place it in those grooves with a sharp tool that is made of iron, and adjust the bag to the warts; and when it is placed on the skin, keep it tight so that it does not move or slip; and then cure those warts with the cure. May be the quality of the cure for the warts is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which has been boiled according to the tolerance of the patient; and be careful that it is neither too full nor too empty.
And then place the mallet on its two feet, and raise its legs to a height of about three inches; and then pour the cure on top, and then pour it with your hand into the bag, and squeeze out as much as can come out; and then remove the cure and the mallet takes its legs away from the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to sneeze, hold it back as much as possible; and if he sleeps for an entire night in that position, it is more likely to be a cure.
If instead you will use those in the solucions of the stomach and the cure for the hernia, then you repeat the cautery until it is cured.
And if in the crotch are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses, then use a sharp and pointed cautery, of which the points are made to cut with ease.
For the treatment of pus.
You have already said and I agree that the cure for those with pus is different from those without it, and I say the cure for them with medicine according to the complement.
Therefore I say that pus is diverse according to where it is formed and according to the location where the pus is formed.
And the causes of pus are also caused by a bad diet, incisions with a blade, stab with a lance, cut with a knife, or similar to those who cause the pus from its causes.
And the pus that is in the body parts are also caused by a plague that falls on the head, neck, foot, stomach, back, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the cure for some plagues so that that reasoning and rule is not applied to other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, because the remembrance of the composed things will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a bad diet or from a similar cause, and it has already been broken by a club so much only and it is a great plague and you fear for the patient's life from an abscess of pus, then you must cauterize and wash the head frequently, and do not delay; and extract according to the quantity of its virtue if there is no more cause to prevent cauterization, more so if the plague that has been caused is little.
And be cauterization of what is opposite to the plague that has begun; and keep the patient from repletions, and from eating and drinking gross things.
And if by moderation there is no more cause to prevent, then lessen the food and do not bring it near meat or wine.
And wait for the plague, if it is an abscess that you cauterize, put a sharp needle into rose oil only or into wine in which it is strained.
And if you are sure that it is an abscess that has been cauterized, then wait for the plague, if it is new and the air has not changed that powder that I recommend to put on.
And if the air has already changed that, then wait for a wet day inside until it is healed.
And if the plague is great or it is caused by an incision of a blade or similarly, and their lips are not adjusted for the puels, then adjust those with sewing according to what I recommend about the sewing of them.
And if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and it is not retained but only a small suspension, then incise that and cure the plague with medicine and restore the meat to its place from a club, and order for the patient that he eat food of which it is gross: cheese and milk and beef, and cow's udder, and sheep's blood, and pork.
And if you smell a putrid smell in the club and it does not adhere to the bone, then you cut it all and pour it out, and then cure it.
And if in these plagues there is an artery or vein through which the plague flows out, and it has not been cured with medicine, then you inquire about the artery, and if you smell that it does not subside, then you cut that with a blade, or lacerate it; and if necessity compels you so that what we have said does not conform to it, then you cauterize it until the plague is gone.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore you powder those with that powder, because established it before the air changes that.
And the way of that powder is this: prepare rose oil from one part, dragon' s blood from two parts, and non-extended causes from three; all mixed together and shaken well, and if the plague is filled with it, and compelled by good constriction until it sticks to it, and coagulated with the blood.
And you put that over the puvils and let it sit there, and do not release it while it is like that so that it is not an abscess, because it is not extended from it the medicine before it is healed.
And never use that powder alone for cauterization when you have not mixed it with rose oil and dragon' s blood.
And this mixture of operation should be done in great plagues when it is necessary to pause them over those and let them sit, and only recently suffered plagues with their plague, the air has not changed that.
And if the air has changed them, especially in summer, then do not put that powder on, but cure those with water that we have said, whether you pause over those wet day by day, or over their feet of flour with water and honey within that it is a poyredura; and then cure those with other treatment until they are healed.
And if it happens with the plague that is a fracture in an oss, and it is small, then you extract it with care.
I direct the cure for fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
For the crotch's plagues.
And if it happens with the plague in the crotch, then there is a difference in treatment, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
And if the nerves of the crotch are incised or arteries, then they are not treated with that which causes violent constriction, as with mustard and salt, because it damages the nerves and prevents them from healing; therefore you avoid treatment for those nerves with water that causes a stinging sensation. And do not pause over any plague by reason of all is fresh, for the substance of the nerves is fresh and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the pus from all the limbs.
And if that is cured with light medicines, so washed with warm water, and a small amount of rose oil or not-rose oil, and heated when it is washed with warm water, and let them sit in the oil.
And if the plague is great, then administer sewing, or tighten their lips; and then cure that with powder until it is healed.
And if the plague has depth or happens to the pus that is low in the hole with a poyredura, then pierce that in the deepest place.
And if the plague has already been incised and there is a flow of blood from the plague, then separate or dry that, or cut that with a blade, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to water.
And if the spine of the neck has already been incised or all, and the veins of the crotch are saved, then you adjust those labias of the club with sewing on the hair of the neck and do not touch that; at once take off that and reduce it to its natural figure, and fasten it with a good constriction; and let it sit for some days; and then cure that with water in which stinging nettle and excitement are added until it is healed.
If the plague has already made its way into the bone, then strike it with your hammer, and if there are pieces of bone that can be removed, take them out as much as you can; and if that is not done, let it remain where it is so that the plague can rot away from it, and separate it from the rest of the body to be made clean.
And if the plague is new, then sprinkle on it the powder that I have recommended for you. But if the plague is made by a fistula, then heal it with the help of the medicine that will come from the place where the fistula is.
If it is struck by a spear or an axe and the depth is known, then consider whether there is wind from the plague as the patient walks; know that the plague is deadly.
And if there is no depth to the strike and the plague is new since the last sacrifice, then pause in it at the first hour with powder, and do not press too hard so that the sacrifice does not remain in the depth of it and returns to the body, but rather pause in it a wet substance, and rub it with two hands for three days.
And if the ointment is not with you, then pause in the orifice of the plague until it sucks up what there is of moisture; and let the patient lie down on the plague so that it runs out what is in it.
But if three days or more have passed since the plague appeared and there is no spasms, tremor of heart, or constriction, and sometimes other good dispositions of it, then know that the plague is cured; and heal it with water and with the other cure within so that it is healed.
But if the healing of it is delayed and has already been opened for a long time, then know that it has already turned into a fistula; heal it therefore with its capital.
And if the plague is by a spear or an axe and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then heal it with water that has been preceded by sutura, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if the plague has already gone into the bone and has already separated these parts, then twist the plague and pull out those parts, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them as the plague rots in it, and the extracting of it is made clean.
And of the other accidents of the plague in the other members, the cure is the same as that which we have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The disposition that occurs in the belly is great or small or moderate.
A small disruption is difficult in another way, and if you do not protect yourself from the intersection of it in its place, for soon it will open and become thicker so that the instrument of it becomes difficult to handle.
And therefore the best disruption is moderate, for in this there is no difficulty in reducing the bowel, and it can be done with ease on both sides that have been mentioned before.
And know that the sutura of the belly is second to four ways, but two suturas are common which are also applied to other plagues of the body.
And two proper suturas communicate with the other plagues, but nevertheless only one proper sutura is made in the belly.
I recommend to you all that exposure and explanation.
So say that when the plague is small and there is no cause of the bowel for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it happens in one of two ways: either by the small disruption as we have said, or when the bowel is drawn back by the cold air.
And therefore, when it is like this, cover that you cut off from the bowels before you dip a sponge or a damp cloth in cold water, or take water from a stream, and from a spring, and from the sea, and immerse it into the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
And some have found that water that has been made cold by being exposed to the air, and it is better than cold water alone in resolving inflammation.
And if you see that the inflammation is resolved, then wet the bowel with water that has been made warm by the sun, for by water it is allayed because of its few causes.
But if the instrument of it is not suitable for this cure, then cut off the disruption with a small instrument that has been used for hemorrhoids.
And the first cure is best when it is proper that there is no sectioning off, and no occupation to cut off at need and to starve it.
As for the instrument, consider its shape:
The first choice of it is acute, and the other not acute, and at its end subtle, but not as subtle as spasm, which is somewhat blunt.
And therefore, when the plague is increased and there is a bowel outside of it, then know that its reduction should be according to its natural shape, in its own place, if possible on top of it, for it is better.
But if the disruption is great and it is in the upper part of the belly, then let the patient lie down on his back, and pause his head further than his feet; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then pause the head of the patient towards the feet, and the feet further than the head.
And in general if the disruption is in either of the two parts of the belly, then pause your intention and your contemplation always in one place so that the part on which the plague occurs is higher than the other.
And therefore know how to administer to the great plagues and to the moderate plagues.
And in the small plagues, then prepare water that is at hand, and make the ministering between your two hands, which have the whole disruption with them, and adjust their lips, and discover the cause of the suture somewhere else.
And this is the common way of suturing: one in which you hold the needle, or count the needle according to the quantity and the width of the plague; and then let go of the end of the disruption of the little finger, and tighten the needle a second time, so that it does not fall into the two extremities of the knot, but rather leaves them behind the extremities of the knot, so that it enters from that part; and you have added the two extremities of the knot and the two extremities of the thread, and there are four orders.
And then strengthen the wire double in the course of the needle, and some loops of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the plug by addition; and then leave the thickness of the thread and make another hole in that place, and then tie it up to the first hole; and do not stop to do so if it is necessary to add needles before you have completed all the knot of the plug.
And the needles should be little between thickness and subtility, for the needles subtilely cut through the flesh very easily; and the thick ones are of difficult use in the thread, so that by that means they should be little both in thickness and subtility.
And do not stop that the needle is fixed in two points of the thread close to each other by means of, lest the flesh be cut very easily and the plug be made before its consolidation.
And are not prolonged with a thread so that the plug is not prevented from solidifying.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not hang on the patient's leg and place your hand over the sutures with dust spread from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them inside until you know that the plug has already hardened.
And these species of sutures with needles are most suitable in small plugs, for until the sutures there is a needle or two, and tie them up.
Might the second suture be made in this way: and it is that you bring together to the suture all four ends, of the thread and two extremities of the knot, in a loop, with the needle in the middle, little by little and gently; and leave them until they are hard.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that middle point in which you began, so that the wire retreats and comes out of the second loop on top of the plug, so that the suture is a second stitch on a piece of cloth, which is strong.
And leave between each stitch the quantity of the thread's thickness less.
And this stitch will be known to men.
And at that stitch I had cured the patient who was in his belly, who had been struck by a knife, and it was the breaking of the main plug by two palms from the patient' side, which was a rupture of a palm in the middle of his member; and then I reduced that piece until the budel has been broken for twenty-two hours.
And the plug was hardened in the space of ten days or so, and I cured him and made a hole with needles and thread for that reason, and it was agreed to make him well.
And the other members had not been cured; and by a miracle it was healed, because I did not cure him with the ointment, for it was in a place where the ointment is not taken or any medicine, but I placed on the plug a piece of cloth twice a day and washed it well with water from honey within that it was healed.
Might you make two species of sutures proper to each other's narrative of Parola.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the thread, and put the needle into the hole inside of the hole from outside.
And then when the needle penetrates into the thread and in that same point of knot and along all the body, and leave the end of the knot in which you have put the needle; and make the other end of the thread penetrate inside the hole from outside to the hole inside, and leave it.
And then when you have finished that penetration, then you will make another penetration with the needle in that same point of knot and along all the body, and leave the end of the knot which you have made; and make the other end of the thread penetrate inside the hole from outside to the hole inside, and leave it.
And then make that penetration with your own hand with which you have made that penetration in the knot and along all the body, and leave the end of the knot which you have made; and make the other end of the thread penetrate inside the hole from outside to the hole inside, and leave it.
And then begin from that point and cut it with your own hand at the end of the thread which is in the knot and along all the body, and leave the end of the knot which you have made; and make the other end of the thread penetrate inside the hole from outside to the hole inside, and leave it.
And then make a loop with a thread and another loop within that one so that you make the whole knot according to that example.
And the whole sum of this way of suturing is that you stitch with a thread to the skin, and not to the hair; for example, you sew the knot one time on one side of the thread's end, and leave that other loop complete inside.
Might the second species of suturing be known as the suture of Gualia, and this is said by him to be done; for example, you stitch that other half-loop with needles in which you put some medicine, and not to put it on the skin; for it is that you apply the end of one part to another part of nature in which it is convenient; and you apply the other end of this one to the end of the other, and so is done according to what I have told you.
And then you put the needle in the end of the hole from outside to the hole inside, and make that half-loop with needles in which you put some medicine; and not to put it on the skin; for it is that you apply the end of one part to another part of nature in which it is convenient; and you apply the other end of this one to the end of the other, and so is done according to what I have told you.
And then you turn those loops around, and make that half-loop with needles in which you put some medicine; and not to put it on the skin; for it is that you apply the end of one part to another part of nature in which it is convenient; and you apply the other end of this one to the end of the other, and so is done according to what I have told you.
And this way of suturing is better than the common way of stitching, and is a stitch which I have remembered before.
This is said by Gualia
And may they say it, a stitch of the belly is made correct with two needles, so that you put this needle in there, and begin with the needle' s work; and make that needle penetrate inside the other part according to the way of stitching those which I have sewed together.
And you know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitch of it is more difficult than that of the other places of the belly.
And the judgment of medicine for the disease is different from the other diseases'.
And that cause is why when you get the disease recently before it is changed by the air, and reduce the intestine and stitch it together well; and then place that powder on the skin.
And if the air has already changed the plug, then place that powder on the skin which is in your presence, so that it does not make a hard knot and do not get stuck; and let them be hardened knot and hole; and then heal that one like those others within that it is healed.
And if you do not have any medicine with you, then place that powder for half the time, because it begins to burn, and change that piece twice a day; and make those two pieces of thread between those days, and teach them how to do this, so that they are healed, because you do not want any other medicine in these situations when the diseases are simple.
If you fear that the plague will spread to the main members, then cover yourself with wool wetted in oil of sumerge or rosewater, and place it on the circuit of wounds between the thighs and leave the bandages there.
And if they feel pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for it is often seen, then rub that area with a black poultice and more so if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and an exit has been formed penetrating into the cavity of them.
And know that the pus that comes from the intestines is lighter in healing than that which comes from the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gegunu" does not receive plague that enters it all; and this is because of the great multiplicity of veins that are in it and because of its magnitude which is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of them, and because of their proximity to nature of nerves.
But if what you are treating with is plague, and you have recently opened it, then follow the recipe of your doctor for treating intestines.
But if the space has passed and it is already green or black, then place a poultice with blood on the area that has been damaged by them, so that blood flows from it, for in the intestine there are veins and arteries.
Then cut off another piece of the same thread, and place its two ends pendent on the edge of the hole through which the plague enters them, so that the attraction of them is relieved from your body, so that the shelter of the intestine and emission of the pus of the plague may be prevented.
Remind yourself of the plague when it happens in the intestines.
When a disruption happens in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible that it will be restored in some men, because thus has been seen before that one who was infected in the middle part of his stomach with the point of a lance, and that plague was old and had become a fistula, and from it there came pus and water.
Then follow the cure of them already known that it is not confined in the healing of them, but also remove the pus that makes the wound heal and consolidates the area.
Then see the consolidated wound, and place on them the patient's clothes that you have over the injury in his belly; and do not put anything that would cause a bad accident and break their natural dispositions to eat and drink, and then bathe and exercise them.
Then said some experienced ones that when you get plague in the intestines and it is small, then tie them according to this way: and it is that you take a knot of those large knots; and then place one of these knots on the two lips of the plague and tighten its mouth, then when you put it on them and tighten their mouth, cut off the head of them, because they adhere to each other and do not dissolve.
Then place another knot near the first one, and do not stop making knots all along until you have tied all the plague.
Then remove that knot and tie the plague together; and let those heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with a thin thread which comes from the intestines of animals because it is fine in its length; and it is that you take the end of these intestinal threads, and if it is dry it will be torn, and then bind the end to another thread that you hold, wrapped, and then introduce this thread into needles and tie it with the thread that comes from the intestine, and reduce that one to a disruption.
This way of sewing with knots is just another trusted and hopeful way.
But if the plague is large and widespread, especially in a small intestine, because then only subtility can be achieved, and it is not healed by them at all.
Of treatment with oil of zuchene and fistulas.
Know that any plague and pustule when it dries up and becomes old, and is a ulcer, and does not consolidate and gets pus all the time and does not dissolve, then in any member it is called universally a fistula, and we call it oil of zuchene.
And the fistula according to truth is a nodacion felted, hard and white which does not hurt and at which there is a depression like a wound; and so it is named that one of some rice, that is pain.
And in wet men, which gets water; and the water is removed from it in some hours. And sometimes this moisture becomes dust, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And all these causes have been shown, and they highlight those and the treatment of them with medicines in the division.
Then know that the treatment of fistula, which is achieved by surgery.
And know that fistulas happen in all parts of the body; for some of them reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the cipha (spina), or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the cavities, or any of the joints composed by means of the main bone and of the hand; and from those are that they give proximity to the main member and similar ones.
And therefore that one of those fistulas which is according to this way is of the difficult healing plagues, and they do not receive cure, and they occupy themselves with that work and ignorance.
But if one of those fistulas is so deep that it reaches the areas that we have mentioned, and you wait and trust in the healing of them, then try to make it by fire or iron, and if the fistula follows the recipe and you inquire about it with them.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with subtle lead, because lead with its lightness relieves the curvature of the body which causes this twist.
And if the fistula is large and horrendous, it is impossible for you to mean anything about it with attempts.
Then seal the orifice by sewing them up, because the moisture that you use to clean it up will run from one hole and go out through another.
Then inquire carefully, according to which way you think it is possible that you recognize if here are bones or nerves, and this fistula is distant or near, or it is a fistula that has only orifices and is over it all with the whole of your strength, with your burial, for which you bury the patient, and from which you extract the cause of pain by compressing them with your hand over the area, and the signs of the symptoms and causes of the accident to the pustule.
And when you have considered all of those things to be true, then go to the treatment according to your confidence: and that is that you consider whether it is a fistula that appears close to salt or far from joints, or nerves, or arteries, or veins, or one of the places that I told you about.
Then you shall cure it according to what has been said before about its appearance: and that is if it is in a filth and of corrupt meat, and if it is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of a tooth, or similar, and treat it inside so that it be healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and follows the rectum, then cover it up as much as possible, and clean out all corrupt meat; and introduce sharp medicines wrapped in rags, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood.
And do this to it several times so that the sharp medicine corrupts all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula by the corruption.
Then restore it with a good poultice that heals the healthy meat within so that it be healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then you shall cauterize it according to what we have said.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of it, then you shall examine it and cure it according to what we have said; and if you do not find any cause of a vein or nerve or main member nearby, as we said before.
But if the bone is discovered and it is in any corruption and darkness, then cut out all that is corrupted; and cure it with sharp medicine so that it be healed.
And if it does not heal and the pus flows out like a spring, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then discover again upon the second aspect and accurately examine it and clean it up with a strong medicine, and restore it.
And if it is healed, then you will know that it is; but if not, then you shall know that the corruption is in the depths of the body, which you have not reached, and so go on searching for it.
And if the bone is corrupted in a small part, or if you can reach it, then throw it with forceps that are suitable to it.
And if there are any bones, then carefully extract all of them, and leave none behind that could cause trouble with your strength.
But if there is any cause of moisture that causes an odor and there is no mistake or error in it, then cut off those limbs or meats if they are here, and set free the bones.
But if you have not prepared yourself to hang the bones of your own body, then suspend them by a rope that can bear the weight of those bones, and leave that which is inside with those bones of meat and limbs, and keep the weight that has not been hardened, and the section that you have cut be bound so that it does not come apart.
While you are waiting, if you fear, then suspend them in a vat of oil that is three times its depth, or in the Egyptian unguent, or in any of the green medicines; for when those limbs are rinsed, and the bones are separated from the meat, and this attraction is lifted off, it will be pleasant.
But if it is a large bone like the back or chest or thigh, and if what is corrupted is only the surface of it, then cut off that which is rotten and black, and restore the weight.
But if what is corrupted is a great part of it, and the corruption has reached the bone's marrow, then you must cut off all of it and cut into that place where the corruption has entered; and cure it so that it be hardened.
And I recommend to you that you go to a man in your service so that he suspends it by a rope, and assists you in your operation.
He sent for a young man of about thirty years of age, who suffers pain in his side, and if there is any separation inside it, then examine the matter inside the body by what comes out of the body, and it is matter that is thick, and he does not have an external cause.
And then he sent it to be examined by the doctor in charge of such cases before the apoplexy becomes great, and he ordered the movement of the tissues, and the cure was begun inside that the back is fistula, and the orifices from which all the pus comes out are poked and the moisture of the body.
And then many doctors were called in for about two years, and I was not included in their council.
And I saw the back of him and the matter that ran from those orifices for a great distance; and his body was completely weak, and its color was yellow.
And then I inserted my hand into one of those orifices and felt the bone.
And then I searched carefully all the orifices and found that all the separations of the back come from there.
And then I went to my room and examined one of the orifices carefully, and discovered a separation in the bone, and it was rotten, and it had already been broken and corrupted; and one part of the back had separated from that which was inside the ilium.
And then I quickly put the bone in order so that it be ready for me.
And I recognized that what was rotten was not in the bone but in a place where it had separated; and I had already removed all that was separated.
Then I completed the restoration of the weight with solid medicines for a long time, and it did not solidify.
Then I went back and examined the bone again on what I had discovered first, and continued the corruption to the bone.
And I made sure that there was not any more corruption in it, and then I went to make the cure of him and complete his restoration, but it was not completed.
And then I discovered another place on him and did not cut it into pieces in order to make the cure of it, but I cut it piece by piece carefully and made the restoration of him with medicines, and it was hardened slightly and healed.
And there was no need to repeat the surgery of him or cut it in pieces but because of the patience of him and his lack of fear and his concern for death from a sudden collapse due to excess vomiting, which happens to him at any time because of the discomfort.
And so he was healed completely, and nothing remains of the bone that is tough; and it returns to its virtue, and it is changed into its former state, and does not cause him any trouble in walking or any other thing.
But if the bone is prominent in the place where it should not be cut yet, then you shall cut it according to this manner: and that is that you hold the bone at the end of the bone that is prominent, and order someone to stretch it; and then stretch that part of the flesh that is next to the bone, and extend its end so that it can be cut by a sharp knife; and then you shall cut the flesh from the bone, and you shall discover the bone with a sharp knife.
And let the table be placed under the bones properly, because when you do so there is no prohibition against the saw that does not cut through the corrupt meat.
And so that the saw is working on the spot of corruption little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces the saw to be seen from another side.
And if the bone is corrupt and not prominent, move one piece continuously towards the other, and the corruption is in a place or part of it, then you uncover all the meat completely; and let the table be placed under them, and let the saw work on that spot until it is done properly, so that the saw continues working on the other side.
And so that the saw works according to the place of corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut that joint that is corrupt, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but in one.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the body or foot, it is difficult; however, when you ask about the place where the corruption appears to you, and cut it off, and make it according to each disposition that you can do so, and if there is no harm in doing so, then correct it for you, because it does not go against your will.
And you should know what the instruments are for cutting these bones and how they are prepared, and their size, subtlety, greatness, smallness, hardness, and rarehood; therefore, prepare all kinds of special tools suitable for that operation.
And you should know that this operation requires the use of specific tools, and how long and careful your study and practice of this art should be; since, if you have not done so before, first learn about the appropriate tools for each type of surgery.
And I will give you the list of instruments that you can use in your surgery, simple ones for the beginning, so that you can practice without difficulty what I have told you about the operations on the body. The form of the saw:
A different form of saw:
A different large saw:
The form of the raze: The head of this raze should be according to the shape of a star's claw, and the points of it according to the shape of the points of a key.
And you do not want to see them, except that when they are deformed or corrupt in the joints, and if the mouth is wide.
The form of a smaller raze:
The form of a lat raze:
The form of a different saw made in a certain way: Let the saw be placed under the bones properly, and let it be made from iron with keenness, and make the member of the body with knives properly cut. The form of wood:
The form of a raze with a concave shape:
The form of a different subtle raze:
The form of a different curved-end raze:
The form of a small raze resembling a tentacle:
The form of a different smaller incisor tool:
The form of another incisor tool resembling a raze and the end is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the joints of the bones:
The form of the raze that is used to cut through the bones properly:
And the end of it is triangular and has an acute tip.
It is made of Indian steel, and resembling all that we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
Of incisor ends and the serration of the bones.
And the ends should be used for an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with medicines and cure does not confer with those medicines, or sometimes the corruption is caused by a member who does not affect any cause, then know that you cut off that member where the corruption appears, so that the disease escapes through it from this member.
And the sign of that member is blackened, so cut off that member where it has burned up the whole body, and if you are not sure whether it is blackened or not, then cut off a part of it, and if it is blackened, then do so; otherwise, leave it.
It is similar if the corruption is caused by some poisonous causes, such as a scorpion, a snake, or a vulture, and of other kinds.
And if corruption or percussion is at the end of it, then you cut it and do not give space for corruption to enter the body.
And if you approach the body, then you cut that which is at the end of the limb, and do not give space for corruption to enter until it reaches the arm's joint.
And if instead of that you cut the arm, then you cut the arm at the elbow joint.
And if another corruption and turn around the thigh, then it is death for the patient; and other causes are not necessary to cure them, because there is a quantity of virtue.
And if corruption in the shape of the foot, then you cut that which is at the end of the foot, and do not give space for corruption to enter until it reaches one of the toes.
And if you take hold of the toe of the foot, then you cut all the foot. Or if it is possible to get under the knee, then you cut the back at the joint of the knee.
And if corruption has already entered under the knee, then it is only necessary to cut it and leave the patient to die.
And the way of cutting the limb or of sawing it is that you tighten the ligature in the place where you want to cut, and another ligature on the spot; and extend the minister a ligature at the joints apart, and extend another ligature on them; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures until all the flesh is exposed; and then it is cut or sawed.
And when a strip of linen is placed on all joints in such a way that it does not touch the spot, and so that it comes to the patient's injury with just a bandage and poultice;
Or if you work blood when it is hot, then you cauterize the spot with care, or apply some powder to tighten the blood; and then return to your medicine until it is completed.
And then tie the aching limb with a ligature at the joint, and care for that until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that a man in his thigh, this is the accident which has happened to him, the which was assembled with fire that was burning.
That corruption first happened in the limb which hangs down all the foot.
And then that man prepared himself for that injury more than the cure came to the limb with great speed which he had because of his pain and his heat, and he cut that foot at the joint, and fire healed it.
Long time happened to him that corruption in the limb of the body, which is below the knee, was assembled with fire.
And then I struck him, and so my piercing went over the body of the patient for a moment, approaching the purification of his skin; and that piercing did not continue and began to go into the other limb at the joint where it had begun in the body.
And then I called on him to cut the body of the patient, and I did not want to give space for that piercing of his superfluitat, and more than that I had to do with the cutting of the body of the patient because his virtue was in his destruction.
And then he went away from me, and he returned to his land and came to me that man prepared himself and I cut all of his body, and it was healed.
And I do not add to this story except that it is an aid for me who encounters this disease, and by which I am understood, and by which I turn around.
For the cure of wounds and with the quality of a poultice with medicines.
When a puss forms on some large member of the body and the space of the puss is prolonged until it connects with the wound, then it is broken and pierced, and the wound comes out from it as if it were a vessel, and the seam that has opened it is sewed up with a thin thread, and it does not spread to the bone or to the nerves or to the ligature, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged until the corruption approaches some member, then it is called a fistula and not a puss.
And the cure of it is that you cut that seam all around, and mainly when it is made thin and sewed up with a cloth, and check that it does not stick to the spot because of its corruption.
Or if you hope that the seam will adhere and that that corruption has not reached the back end, and the seam is open on one side, then you care for it with a poultice.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm which you have is very foul smelling, then you poultice it with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil, and vinegar, and honey receive parts mixed together, and make them fit into a vessel, and place them over fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches its aim.
And then you take from it water which is necessary and dissolve the honey in it; and poultice it with that sinus, and tighten its orifice, and place the medicine in it for two hours.
And then you take it out with care; and water it for many days until that sinus is purified and its pain is relieved.
And some are poulticed with ash water, when this medicine is not presented to you; and it is that you take the ash from fire, and place it on the water; and then take it and poultice it into the sinus, and tighten its orifice, and I am told that the sinus will stay closed.
And if the patient has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then poultice it with honey and water and mix together vinegar, and poultice it with that mixture, because of the properties of honey is that it purifies and washes away, and the vinegar binds the sinus, and mainly when there is superfluitat of stiffness and dryness.
And when you make water for some time and are told that the sinus is relieved, then poultice it with water which causes the flesh to become firm.
And it is that you take from the oil of roses and dissolve that which I have mentioned in the treatise about oils, or that you poultice it with some medicines and wet others which have their properties, as those which I have described in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the poultice does not reach the bottom, then you increase it little by little, and stop up a few times wrapped with an Egyptian ointment or with basil ointment until it is increased.
And if the orifice is wide, then you add sutures to its sides and leave the quantity in which there is added between the poultices because it is a wide opening.
And if the orifice of it from which the arm comes out is raised above the joint, then you dry it in the pus base where it is on top because when the arm is confined in the sinus space the flesh remains in its place.
And if it is not possible for you to cut the sinus out of its environment, the base of the bone, then you pierce that member as you prepare it so that it runs away easily according to how it is dressed, and so that it does not keep any cause of the arm in its place.
May that is above the orifice of the sine, which remakes every hour so that escapes that is placed in it of linen and does not come out again. And so you will know if what comes out from the arm is much or little, or whether it is digested or not.
And so you consider the place of that sine, if in it feels the patient pain or no, and whether is in him apoplexy.
And if your medicine is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is placed on the orifice of the sine has already been adhered, or has become adherence, then take it out or the third day, and when you remove the drape, change it with another and renew the water.
May if from the sine comes a subtle virus, then do not despair of the adherence of linen, for the healing of it is obtained, because in some men the generation of flesh in the plague lasts, and in those is made the opposite of it.
And if from the sine comes much pain in a digestive way, then you will know that the sine does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sine is prolonged and causes this, then you adjust the medicines to be dried up, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, are dry them with water with salt.
And the last to treat it is that you take of water with salt and dissolve it in oil of rose, and be put on it a piece of wool, and use that one.
And already seems to be done in that action, when there is no pain, take water with salt and dissolve it in oil of rose, and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and knead them, and powder all over the honey where it is placed that is thick, and put it on a drape and tighten it around the sine; and roll the one over the other.
And some times are administered to it a long-winded aromatics and razors of celestial lily (and is the celestial lily) and flour of erys and centaurea, and use them simple or adjusted, knead them and sift all over the honey that I have recommended; and cover with it.
And if the sine is prolonged and not healed with this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in its root, and it has already been done an inquiry in the bones or in other hard members or to the ligaments; then you treat it with a treatment with a tube, when the wound is cured.
Of treatment of sore and fingernails rubbed and incision on finger added and section.
Is a sore and the nail rubbed and incised on the finger added and sectioned.
And so when you have that one with water that I have said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then you cut all the excess that is rotten from the nail and cauterize the wound there, for cauterization is useful in this case.
May if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and those additions of the nail are already taking up the flesh on the inside, and it begins to sting and bite that one, then you pause a sharp line of water from the roots of the nail that stings the flesh, and pour that one over it and cut it with a pointed instrument; and place that one over it and cauterize it with a burning instrument so that it is burned up; and cure that one with water.
May if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then you cut that one and remove it, for no time is healing that is done which is in it corrupted.
And if the corruption and the corruption go to that finger, then you cut it according to that one is remembered, and cure that one inside so that it is healed.
May if to the nail there is a percussion or an atricion, and that there is pain there in it, then you cut the bad one, and immediately dry the nail with water by making a transverse section on top of it, and keep so that the section does not reach within the flesh which is under the nail, for you make the bad one cause a pain violent; and afterwards causes a birth of the flesh that is placed. And cure that place with water that gives pain.
May is placed, which is born in the most of some men, very much is meat all; and very much is meat in it bones, or very much is meat in it nail.
And some are born in the root of the joint, or are born in some fingers of the hand or foot. May those that are born in some fingers of the hand or foot do not hurt; and those who are born in the joints very much hurt.
And of those that are born meat, the section is slight, and it is because you cut out the root of that one with a sharp instrument.
May if he is born in the roots of the joint, the treatment is difficult; and so you should guard against the absence of him.
May if he is born in a finger, then you cut the flesh of that one with a round incision within the bone, and close it with a sharp instrument; and cure that place inside so that it is healed.
May the consolidation that happens to them between their movements or by birth of man who is born there in it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similarity; and so you dry that consolidation inside so that they do not return to their natural form.
And then put between them those drapes of linen impregnated with oil of rose so that they are not hardened; and separate them or place between them a thin piece of lead so that it is hardened according to what you should do.
And by similarity if it happens consolidation in some fingers on the hand or foot, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and fit it to the form of the member.
Of incisions, these are varicose veins.
And varicose veins are thick veins full of excess fluid that comes from the members of the body, and more so in the legs, and more so in the hands of those who travel or work a lot, and most in the hands of travelers and workers.
And so if you administer an infusion of black cholera a few times with the help of a strong wind, then draw blood from the patient's basilic vein.
May the treatment of them be according to two ways: one is that it is cut and blood drawn from it; and the other way is that it is raised and all blood is drawn out.
The first sentence translates to:
Then give it to him and order him to refrain from black poultice-making.
Then repeat the cure by bloodletting when veins are filled, and inform the mule of this.
But if the hair of the mule is long, and there are no beads to cut off, then trim it with a comb and a sharp knife, then dip it in water until it is damp; or exercise it by walking much, if bathing is not convenient for you, so that the member becomes swollen.
Then dry the tail in the right place of the vein by cutting it long or short at the back or at the front; you can cut it if it is at the front.
Then open the tail with your nails and cut off the vein completely until it is seen, and if it is black, then it will turn darker.
And if you are done with that, and from the tail there remains a white cord, then it should be tied.
Then tie those two legs together where they are raised and the tail is hanging, and hang them by a weight of ten or twelve pounds.
Then dry another section near that one for three fingers, then cut off the tail from the top of the vein until it is seen.
Then raise that one and cut off that one in the back section, then pull out that one from the top of the second section until it is cut off, then pull out that one from the middle section.
Then take it so that you pull out that one from the top or bottom of all the sections until all is cut off, then cut off that one.
And if you do not obey me and do not cut off and raise it, then put a sharp needle in your hand, tie that one and pull it out, or turn it over with your hand so that it is twisted all around. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that one and it will come back with pain on the mule.
When all is cut off and gone, then put the foot in its place, dip it in water that is rose-colored and not rose-colored, and cure it where it needs to be cured.
And if the blood has been contracted and is twisted in the joints, and it is not second right side as I said before, then cover that one completely with a bandage, and hang it by a weight.
And be careful that you do not cut off the vein or hurt that foot, for it will be difficult to raise that one, and use your caution in that foot.
Shape of the incision made by the scalpel when the vein is dried up:
It is not sharp like a hook, and it is not of acute extremities so that the vein is not hurt; and it is of great flexibility, for if it were subtle, I would cut off the vein because of its subtlety; but with this great bulk, I have said.
Of the extraction of the blood from the leg.
This vein is found in the legs, as it was said by the Athenians in the land of Arabia and in the dry lands of India, which are few and dry, and there is neither grass nor shade.
And strong veins are found in other parts of the body except the legs.
And the source of it is putrid matter that comes from inside the body, as snakes, worms and scabies are born between the tail and flesh.
And the sign of its coming is this: the vein begins to swell violently, then the area becomes hot and swollen, and then it breaks out like a plant.
And then let him come out; that you wrap yourself over that piece of lead from which is the weight of one dragon; within two dragons, and no more; and place that and leave the lead suspended from the chest.
And as many times as you see that there is a reason for the joint to be outside, wrap it in lead and weigh it down. And if it is prolonged, then you cut off one part of the body and wrap it up; and do not cut off that one because it will contract and go into the flesh, causing abscess and putrefaction in its place, and a bad ulcer will form.
So that it is treated gradually and is taken little by little, until it is completely cut off from the back of the body, and does not hang for any reason in the body.
And this vein has been measured in men who have up to twenty palms' length, and it has already come to me to measure one that is of thirty palms' length.
And if it is cut in the hour of its medicine, then insert a sharp knife into the root of the body and pierce that one with a long knife, so that all the matter inside it is destroyed, and give putrid medicine at the place for several days; and then cure it from ulcers.
And this vein has caused several rashes, and more so when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes out as orifices, and is taken from each orifice.
And then cure that one completely as I have said before, at the end of the foot.
Of the cut above the worms that come out under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called "bovine" in all countries, except for the Athenians; and it is a small worm that is born between the tail and flesh, which goes into all the body, causing pain and breaking the tail; and it appears with the same feeling of illness as the cow's disease.
And its source is putrid matter from some humors when worms, snakes, lobworms, and scabies are born in the belly.
It is feared because of its evilness; for when it enters the body and rises to the head, then it passes out into the belly, causing great pain; and there are worms in it.
And then when you want to treat that one and pull it out, then do not do so without taking a walk; and the feeling of the body should be taken away from it, and if there is no difficulty in pulling it out, then dry it completely over it and pull it out.
And if it is hidden in the flesh and you do not feel it, then stop the cauterium on that place where it lies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the body with putrid matter as I have said before.
May you never send that one to the head, then tighten your hand around the eyebrow with a strong grip, and pull it out; and if the mule needs to be cured of its bad odor, use medicines that remove putrid matter, and do not give any food to generate it.
On treatment of illness by surgery.
This illness is called in our land nafir, and it is a pain that affects some members, and is exchanged from one member to another.
And I have already seen the second which I will recommend to you. A woman with illness was brought to a village, and I discovered her arm swollen and found in the vein of the arm, and as it continued to swell for an hour, I saw that swelling move away from it little by little, as if it were living silver flowing from place to place.
Then the pain in that area stopped and remained in the muscle, and for another hour it stayed there.
And then he went to the other side to reach the other arm.
And then he told me to turn over completely, which I saw; and it astonished me greatly the change of position and the speed from one member to another. And I have already seen this before in my body according to that way, but I have never seen the change of position and the speed from one member to another as it is now. But I did not see such a thing in the woman's body.
And I did not think it was water, but because the woman was young, and her arms and veins were covered, and in this way the sensation of cold changed.
It is necessary that it does not appear according to this reversion of pleasure in those who are happy and have healthy veins.
And when you want to treat the patient, and he feels that pain, then do not appear to him as if he had said, then you will strengthen him on that and let it go lightly and dry on that place so that the wind is prevented from entering, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see the veins of the body, then treat it with hot drinks and expel the winds with pills of fenugreek and of licorice and of seeds.
Of extraction of arrows.
Arrows are different according to the spices, and according to the places of the bodies in which they are planted, because their diversity is that some of them have large points, and small ones, and concave, and flat, and solid; and that some of them have three angles, and those to which they have tongues, and those that have blades.
And as for the serval's neck when you catch an arrow in it and pierce the bone, and is injected into the cerebrospinal fluid which is above the brain, because violent pain, and scotoma, and vertigo, and stiffness in the nerves, and inflammation of the tongue, and convulsions, and confusion of thought, and choleraic vomiting, and a strong pain disappears the word and destroys speech, and is injected into the location of the plague with white fluid like pus, and has the appearance of moisture on the flesh.
And so if these members appear to you, then you abstain from treatment and from extracting the arrow, unless it is outside the body.
But when an arrow has struck the heart, and is close to the left breast, and feels that it is stuck in hard tissue, and does not cause pain; and a strong movement of the arrow is like pulse movement, and the plague goes down from the extremities, and a coldness comes over them, and a hissing sound, and fainting; and if you know that death is near when all this happens.
And when the arrow has struck the lung, it sends out a bubble of plague, and the vessels that are close to the neck spurt out, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales great breath, and seeks air.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the foot, and the pain then occurs near small ribs, and makes a great sound with a painful noise, and all the body's muscles tremble.
And if an arrow strikes the stomach, then there is great pain with no nausea.
And if an arrow strikes the abdomen and is stuck there, then there is a tear in the gut or bowel, or the bladder, which bursts, and there is no hope of extracting the arrow from the body by its extraction.
And if an arrow strikes the bladder and causes a lot of urine to flow out, then know that there is a great cause near the outside, and the pain on the patient is strong; then you will know that it is deadly.
But the other members are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or an artery, and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will recommend this to you, so that you know about the nature of these arrows for treatment.
That is the cause, because in a man an arrow is struck on the lacrimal bone of his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him with the other side, left the ring of his ear, and he was healed; and it did not occur to the eye of his nose.
I extracted another arrow from a Judge, which struck him on the cheek of his face at the root of his ear, left his eyelid, and that arrow was hidden; and it was not possible to extract it completely, because only a small part remained attached to his jaw. And this arrow was a sharp one among the arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head at its end, and it was a great arrow.
And that is the Judge; and it did not occur to his eye, and he was not injured in any other way.
I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had struck his neck, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with ears; and then I inserted a sharp object between two guides, and it was submerged in the neck of him; and then I carefully extracted it, and he healed the Christian.
I extracted another arrow from a man which had struck his stomach, and I thought he would die of it; but then, because thirty days had passed and there was no change in him according to the major dispositions, I inserted myself into the arrow and removed it, and he was healed, and did not occur to him.
I also saw a man in whom an arrow had struck both his thighs, and the plague was consolidated on him, and then he went to the forest, and I extracted the arrow from the root of his crotch.
And I also saw a woman to whom an arrow had struck her abdomen, and the plague was consolidated inside her, and she did not change in her nature according to the major dispositions, and the woman did not harm anyone by her natural tendencies.
Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
Then he removed the arrow from the Prince's head that was stuck in his nose, and had already fallen on the right side a little, and the whole of the arrow was hidden.
And he was called to the cure of him soon after the arrow was lodged; within three days.
And then I found the arrow's pain gone straight away; and then I inquired that subtle thing, and didn't feel it; but he felt the punch on the right ear, and then he hoped that the punch was from the tip of the arrow.
And I spread out the poultice on that place with an adstringent and digestive virtue, promising myself that if the place was clean, it would show me the spot of the arrow, so that it might dry up on it.
And it didn't happen in the accident that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued to spread out the poultice on him for several days, and nothing happened in the accident; but the plague became solid between those days, and it broke out of his nose again on the third day, and he showed me the spot of the arrow.
And then I put on him an acute, corrosive medicine for several days, till it burst open, and then I inquired that, and found the tip of the arrow, which was attached to the bowstring.
And then I applied to the plague with that medicine, within which I could see clearly the tip of the arrow, and it came out to me in four months.
And then the plague became bigger, and I tried to reach it with pincers, but it didn't break or move, so I used another method: I hung it on a hook, as it was described in the book at the end of the chapter, till I removed it; and then that plague healed.
And some doctors said that the cartilage of his nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the plague became solid, and healed the patient completely, without leaving any scar.
And I recommed to you the quality of extracting some arrows, that you regulate and interpret them as above, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by me through narration or comprehension of those books.
And the masters know a little about it, and they interpret what is here and what isn'y; and they invent new operations and new instruments for the removal of foreign causes of disease when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not discharged from the members in which they are stuck, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place where they enter; or by the reverse of the other.
And that which is discharged by the place does not have a specific exit; or it enters into flesh and is discharged outside.
And if you don'y obey the hour when it is caught; then know that you must leave it for several days before you can find the meat that is around it, and that attraction of it and its exit are different.
And apparently if it is stuck in bone and you don'y obey the hour when it is caught; then leave it for several days, and return it to attraction and moisture every day, and it will be discharged.
And if you don'y obey the hour when it is caught for several days; then know that you pierce through the path of the arrow in that bone from all directions with a subtle tool until the spot is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already stuck in the middle of the bone and it is painful; then you inquire that subtle thing, and if you feel it; then you use some tools that are suitable for attracting him.
And if you can'y reach him by the constriction of the plague and its length, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein; then you go under the plague till it is enlarged, and you can extract the arrow.
And if you reach him through his ears that are connected to the bone, then you free the meat in which he is stuck from all sides with all the tools you can use; and invent something about it if you don'y reach the ear with those tools.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from any place where it is, then use the twist of your hand with pincers at all turns till it obeys; and use subtlety after subtlety so that the arrow doesn'y break and you can extract it by your difficult attraction and extraction.
And if you can'y reach him in your hour, then leave him for several days till the parts that are separated from him join together again; and then return to him because he is relieved. But if you feel opposite feelings of heat and cold, then administer to him what I have said about the cure in this book.
And preserve your skill in cutting off veins or nerves or muscles, and administer to him any device that is suitable for avoiding the arrow; and do it easily and calmly and slowly and securely as I have told you and what you heard.
And therefore that you oppose the arrow so that the patient is according to the figure according to which it should be placed on him, because it is more convenient. But if that isn'y possible for you; then administer to him what is possible according to the figures.
But those arrows that are discharged from one side and that enter another part of the body or that hit another part of the body before being discharged; or that makes the tip of the arrow touch the skin above it slightly; then you cut off that part; and extract the arrow because it is easily broken.
But if it is stuck in the bone; then you twist your hand according to the opposite feeling, until the arrow pushes against the bone, and enlarge it, and extract it.
And otherwise, leave him for several days; and then return to him within what is necessary.
And if the tip of the arrow is in that place; then you push it with your hand.
But if the tip is stuck; then you use a sharp instrument to push it between the bone and the arrow head, and then push it with your hand.
If the needle is concave then you push it in strongly as the needle is relieved by it.
And if the needle is poisoned then cover all the meat where the true is placed if it is possible for you, and approach cure that if it suits you.
And if the needle bites into the foot, or into the belly, or into the bladder, or into the ribcage, and it is close so that you touch it with your hand, and you can dry it over it, then dry it over it and guard against a cut of vein or nerve, and pull it out, and if you feel ill, then apply a plaster until it is healed.
Form of forceps for the arrows to be shot:
When they take the ends of their bow that are made with an awl, and they hold it with a pair of pliers so that they do not let go of the arrow.
And of these are made special threads, large, small and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its slenderness, and the tightness of the plaster.
so that it is relieved the instrument in it from the concave arrow, and is pushed with a raze.
Of surgery of veins.
Veins of surgery of which the bleeding is customary to take place from 30 to 40 drops, and of which are in the head. of which are two pulse veins that are applied to the ears, saying hello; two herbs that are in the two temple apparentz; and two veins that are in two lacrimal veins of two holes that are called aspicents; and the prepared vein in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the end of the nose; and two guides that are to the throat; and two veins that are on the right lip; and two veins that are on the left lip; and - these veins are called algelic -; and two veins that are on both sides of the tongue. Then the veins that are flebbotomized in the feet are 12; For the head it is one cerebellar vein, and it is called wild lat, and the people calls  “venas de todo el cuerpo”, and basilica is a vein that is applied to the domestic lat, and it is called citillar, and those call vulgar “vena del vientre”; and from the arm, and it is applied to the fire, and that one is flebotomized, and it is that appears clearly on the pout by a manifest appearance; and the salve, and it is the vein that is between the little ear and the mouth of the little, and there are two ramps.
And in the foot and the leg are three veins: the first of those is that it leaves on the curve of the denolh of the wild lat; and the second one is a small vein, and its place is left to the camba of the domestic lat; and the sciatic vein, and its place is left to the camba of the wild lat; and in the camba are other veins similar to those.
The youth of the veins that are applied to the ears is small and soft and spreading and healing of the head of the old bad.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to whether you are hot: it is that the head of the patient is shaved, and rubbed with a warm cloth; then return the patient's hair to its place in two places behind the ears that are submerged on the head; and wish them with the hand, and if you feel the pulse of those with your hand, here there is no attempt.
Then you take the lancea cutelar, and that one is incised; and then you push that one below the vein in the knot until the blood comes out. And then raise your hand to the vein and the knot to the sides of the patient; and cut that one with an incised knife. And be the length of the cut the quantity of two drops of water; and it is made there a hole as large as a pin.
Then tighten the lances and leave it to heal.
And already has preceded in the beginning of this book the incision of those and their cauterization.
The youth of the two veins is due to the old emigrant and the evil one that causes the eyes to cry often and the blood runs from acute excess through the holes.
And the quality of taking those bloods is according to whether you are hot: tighten the patient' hair to its place in two places behind the ears by means of a knot, so that the pulse can be felt with your hand; and if you feel the pulse of those with your hand, then there is no attempt.
Then you raise the knot above the vein to the sides of the patient with the hand, and push that one below the vein in two places by means of a cut; and then tighten the lances and leave it to heal. Then make those holes as large as a pin.
And then release the patient' hair from its place; and stop the pulse of those for an hour, and then stop it with a lance and tighten that one with a strong pressure, and leave it to heal.
And already has preceded their remembrance, and those the incision, and their cauterization in the beginning of this book.
And therefore the youth of the vein of the forehead is due to the old bad ones of the face, and to the emigrant, and to the pain and the ulcers that cause the stench.
And the quality of that bloodletting is according to whether you are hot: it is that the patient's hair is pulled tight, and a bandage is applied to its place so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossori, of which this is the form:
Then stop the pin that is prominent at the head of the fossori on that vein and hit it with a hammer or another cause in the way, and leave it to run according to the quantity that you want; then release the patient' wound and tighten it to its place so that it is healed.
And some wounds are applied to the bloodletting foot, but it is not said that the bloodletting is of an acute extremity as those others; before, the bone is near and strong; but the bloodletting should be made transversely, because the os is propda and fort and would break in it if the bloodletting were subtle.
The youth of two veins that are the lacrimal ones of two holes by the pain of the hole for the old one and the stench in the holes; and to the bad ones of the face.
And the quality of that bloodletting is that the patient' hair is pulled tight, and those are bled; and you stand on the head of it.
And the bloodletting is made in a transverse way of a little length, because it is not meat there; and if the bloodletting is subtle, the end of it is broken strongly.
Then let the blood run freely according to what you need; then stop those with a knot, and tighten those with a strong pressure, and then release them.
May the bleeding from the nose be related to acute fever and bitter soda, and with facial disorders and headaches that occur in the face, more so when they are old.
And the quality of the bloodletting from him is that the patient tightens his hand and draws it to his left side, and takes the bloodletting subtly long and keeps it in its place in the tip of his nose according to rectitude, for the vein does not appear here, and because the blood begins to flow so soon.
So that you finish the bloodletting little by little and allow the blood to flow according to your need; and then tie it with a knot, for it is restored somewhat lightly.
May the healing of bloodletting from two lines be a constriction of bile and the beginning of leprosy and other bad diseases and sudden headaches and painful ulcers that corrode like herpes.
And the quality of the bloodletting from them is that the patient tightens his hand on each one in his collar with a thread; and the artisan stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then let blood from the vein with long and slight bloodletting little by little; and then take a certain amount of blood or, according to necessity, water; and then make it similar to the other vein.
And then remove the thread and tighten the two veins a little with constriction so that the patient does not faint, and let him lie down because the plague is healed.
And the healing of bloodletting from the veins causes little blisters and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the orbit.
And the quality of the bloodletting from them is that you face the patient toward you, and tighten his collar with a bandage, and then turn his lips on both sides and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the color of each is blacker than that of the other, and water is added because in the circuit of those are small black veins; and then cut either with a scalpel that does not shine.
Then if you have doubt, leave them to be cut by the doctor who cuts the most; and from the manifest blister of those.
And make similar the two veins that are in the lips.
May the healing of two veins that are on the tongue be bloodletting from the head to prevent choking which is in the throat, and to the leprosy of the uvula, and to the leprosy of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is that you face the patient toward the sun, and raise his tongue, and look at it on both sides; and from one side of the tongue there is a vein, and from the other side another, and the color of each is turning blacker.
And then let blood from either; and be careful not to finish your hand in bloodletting them, for they are arteries.
And your veins that are bloodletting in the thigh are those from which all men are accustomed to bleeding, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two ways, or they tie it with a thread of a certain length; or they cut it with a knife, and if it bleeds, then this is its way:
is that it is suitable for opening the concave veins that are full of blood, and to those that contain thick blood; but at those that are small do not open them.
is of very small width and very subtle extremity, and is suitable for bloodletting from thin veins that contain subtle sour blood.
May the healing of bloodletting from the basilic vein be that one of three veins: for it takes the blood from the leprosy that is on the cheek and the head, and from there to the chest and the belly.
is that the bloodletting doctor, when he bleeds from that vein, should keep it and be careful in pricking the bloodletting with a knife, because if he mistakes and cuts it with a knife, there will be a flow of blood; so it is necessary to check that he does not bleed from it with a stabbing knife, before he has cut it with a sharp one.
If the basilic does not appear by a clear sign, then you should let it bleed and move to the other one, or look for some hair; or bleed from the end of the arm, because that vein is obvious; and cut it with a knife, and then bleed it with a stabbing knife.
If you want to bleed him from the arm, then, facing the constriction of the arm that touches the place where you know it is, and place your hand on it; and then turn the arm and cut the vein with a knife, and then bleed it with a stabbing knife. Be careful not to hit the artery.
When you stretch, with a constriction of the arm that touches the place where you know it is, and then that constriction becomes an inflation in the place where you have stretched it on your hand; then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and so it bursts.
If the blood flows in bloodletting like a child's ear, and the blood is thin water, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; and then you stop the bleeding and pause the cut with a long piece; and then put pressure on the cut, and if the blood stops flowing, then you tighten the arm and leave it.
Keep the patient away from moisture of any kind, and be careful of him and do not let him touch that place for a few days until it is healed.
If the blood does not stop flowing and you are in a place where there is no medicine by water, then you cut the artery, if it appears to you; because the end of the vein is contracted, and the blood stops flowing; or that you take a piece of fistula, and break that one, and put the other one on, and tighten it with a thread and with a powder within two days.
And then if the blood has stopped flowing, then it is good; and if not, then treat that place with water from which it is reminded of the place of the powder that stops the flow of blood.
is difficult because of the smallness of the place of leprosy and the possibility of breaking the arm.
May the bleeding from the black vein be healing that it takes the blood from the crown of the head and leaves the body; because it is composed of veins of the basilic and veins of the head, as I have said.
is difficult for the bloodletting doctor because, if he mistakes and cuts it with a knife, there will be stupor in him; and then, if he fixes the cut in bloodletting with a knife and injures the nerve, it will cause him much pain, and it is difficult to heal him; and that nerve appears on the face when it is irritated; and if it is hidden from some people and is thin and does not show, then you should stop bleeding from it with a stabbing knife.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut it in length.
The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and prevents headaches from the hernias of the brain.
And in this particular case, if you want to take blood with phlebotomy from the olive or from the temporal vein; for it is the safest of all veins, since it does not leave the artery or the nerves.
But nevertheless it is very painful in some people when phlebotomy is done at the first puncture, and not struck with it; but does not feel that apoplexy.
The first of it is that you must know that phlebotomy is not administered unless in the conservation of health and for the hope of it, and that it is done in one of the veins that are in the neck, so is: cephalic, facial and basilic; and that it is done at the beginning of spring, at the start of autumn, and in winter just before the meal, when there appear signs of swelling.
And let phlebotomy be done and the third day or at the first moment that of the day passes three hours.
But phlebotomy which is administered, may be done when it causes convenience and necessity or of night or day, in an hour and at all times.
And you must know that it is not phlebotomized until he has been twelve years old, and the woman is not phlebotomized unless she has passed seven years old, and the old ones are not phlebotomized who have already passed sixty years old.
And if anyone wants to be phlebotomized in some way, he must tell the doctor in advance about the hemorrhoids before phlebotomy with a knife, if there is a tear retained, so that the veins do not draw the excesses in the phlebotomy of the hemorrhoids, which are worthless, and do not affect the main members.
And do not phlebotomize the patient who is sick with jaundice and diarrhea, nor those who are drunk or suffering from a fever, unless it is necessary, that is, because of the blood which has come out from him; nor those who have suffered from a hard labor, or from an exercise, or from a meal or from a vigil, or for any other reason that dissolves the strength, either of man or animal.
And consider in subtle way the humors before him if the blood is thick, at meals and drinks, and at medicines if it is possible to come to him.
And enter into the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise by some exercise so that the blood is subtleized.
And do phlebotomy from his feet at noon, so it is around the third hour, thus: when you have said.
And let the foot of that person be kept safe on that day from all animal accidents, thus: when there is anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, thus: when work and unnecessary sorrow and trouble come.
And at the same time let the following things be considered in the use of those: for example, if there is a smell and odor, and balm and similar to them according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is more comfortable, or that the cushion of that person who is to be phlebotomized.
And return his arms, and rub that with the hand of the phlebotomist twice or three times; and tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap that with two drops.
And let the constriction be tight, because the constriction that is not tightened or loosened, or is loosened too much, is prohibited from flowing blood; or it is softened, and the constriction of the blood is stopped.
And tighten it, that the one who is to be phlebotomized rubs his hands together between them before the veins are swollen, and are revealed in feeling.
And let the phlebotomist rub the hands of the patient with a little olive oil in particular; and let him place his hand on the left side of that vein, leaving the spot from which he wants to do the phlebotomy so that the vein runs a little, and the puncture is stopped because the veins are full of blood and when the phlebotomist stops puncturing on that one, it is discovered; and the phlebotomist does not open the vein, and if he opens it, that vein is constricted.
And therefore, through all these things, let the phlebotomist be careful and attentive in all these causes.
And do not stop the phlebotomy, but if the vein is found in a droplet, then it is done; and if not, you will come to another droplet from that place a little, or on the right side of the head, if the place is constricted.
And if the place is constricted, or the patient fears it, then let him rest for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because it will draw out blood profusely, and do not go into the bath.
And repeat the phlebotomy if it is necessary.
And if the vision is small and the blood comes out subtly, and you fear that it will not get the amount you want, then you will repeat the phlebotomy in the same place a second time and adjust in the vision a little, and do it at the meal before the place is constricted, because the place is constricted in some people when it is done a little.
But if that person is constricted already, then do not repeat the phlebotomy there, because it does not excuse you any cause; and stop over that part of the oil droplet, because it pleases the blood vessels. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And administer oil droplet in all phlebotomy, that the veins which are to be phlebotomized are prohibited from constricting the blood, and do not open it with a sharp knife when you stop puncturing on one of them; for the blood comes out subtly and is rolled when it is thick.
And if in the place of phlebotomy a great apoplexy is produced, because drops of blood appear, and more so in that person who does not stop bleeding but that droplet, or in the vision of the vein, then you will fain, and stop over the spot with a sponge infused with salt and water, slightly heated, and tighten it for an hour; for it is dissolved.
And let the water come to the patient from that vein with a complement of him or from another vein.
And if it remains in the place for a few days any black or green color, then you will not see it; and if you want, stop over that cause of aloe and mirra dissolved, or any other cause of mint juice or bitter plant or similar to them.
And apoplexies and hemorrhages will occur in those veins which are to be phlebotomized from the temporal.
E donc pause your hand over that one, and if you feel softness under it, then put your pressure on that eminence, for that is a bad thing; and so guard yourself that you should not place your pressure on that any cause of what I have said, for there will flow much blood from the artery.
And make an ointment with it that is stiffened, so that the place is hardened and then cure this one with other treatment until it is healed.
And when you extract the blood from him to everyone according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the victorious color over the blood, let it appear.
For if the blood is black, then let you leave it to be extracted until it is thinned; and roughly if you turn it thick, then let you leave it to be extracted until it is thinned; and roughly if it is hot, then leave it to be extracted until its sharpness is reduced.
And when that one is full and strong and has a need of extracting blood in a single vein, then the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased and the phlebotomy should flow.
And when that one is freewheeling, then do the opposite of that one; and when you extract that blood in several veins, and the vein should be tight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is that it is the transverse section, not puncturing.
And this way of phlebotomy is saved from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves; and it is more admirable and more saved than phlebotomy according to its height and length.
And when that one is accustomed to arrive at fainting, then do phlebotomy, and if you cure this one beforehand the phlebotomy with a little bread infused with wine or simple oxymel cut; and extract from him the blood in three veins or four.
And if it is a feverish condition of the body, then do phlebotomy beforehand with infused wine or perfumed milk with spices like this one with pepper, cinnamon, ginger and others, or perfumed milk and an aromatic and fragrant thing.
And if it happens to arrive at fainting, then do phlebotomy, and it is a cause of its loss of blood, then let you drink water with milk and perfumed wine; and use aromatic things like this one, and limit your hand on that one.
And use of the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter about fainting by evacuation.
And who wants to throw off his arms and dissolve his blood according to the second vein, then do phlebotomy by means of a motion evacuation, and its virtue is fickle, throwing away little blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in consecutive days.
May who wants to throw off his arms and remove his blood according to the second vein, and his body is strong, then make water before seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
May who wants to throw away the blood of his body in the opposite way of the departure at which it declines, then do so on the second or third day.
May that body in which the blood is already hot and acute and causes fever, then do phlebotomy on it in a single vein and extract a large quantity of it, and increase the vision until it happens to fainting, for if you keep your hand over its pulse, you will not cause death instead of fainting, since the veins will give blood away from that one, rather than from the heart.
And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood according to the second vein, although it is closed the orifice of the vein and is difficult to extract the blood, then press firmly on it with a certain movement and extend it slightly, for this blood is too bad.
While you are leaving it, so that it is extracted again; or remain there on the acuteness of the phlebotomy that is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or place a handful of tar tripe or rosehip on it and put pressure lightly on it until the blood comes out.
And if the vein is detached, then leave that one and do not touch it until the abscess is quiet.
And if necessity forces you to evacuate the blood according to the second vein, and it is not an excuse, then do so on that one place or in another arm in a different vein.
And the vein called "bracelet of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the forearm or biceps, because it is not contracted or contorted, since it is composed of those.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient puts his hand in cold water until the vein swells and the vein appears clearly.
Then make it strong on that one with a certain ligament half-tight; and phlebotomy according to the transverse little, not longitudinally or according to its length.
And be the vision broad and your phlebotomy is with it that you extract it on that one at the joint of the hand a little bit.
And if it is prohibited for the blood to flow, then you will have to repeat your hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
May who is in the summer days, then you are forgiven for repeating your hand in cold water, and the body's pause is placed on cold water in winter time.
And this vein's phlebotomy is more saved than that of any other veins, since it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the right arm's wrist is referred to the blood vessels on the palm of the hand.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand with a certain ligament or with your own, since you put it in cold water, until the vein swells and is clearly visible; and then do phlebotomy on that transverse one; and if you incise that one from all over, then we will not see it anywhere.
And preserve your hand from the phlebotomy, since it only has the nerves of the bare skin.
Then repeat your hand in cold water and let the blood run into that one, since if you do not repeat that one in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the vein's orifice, which is prohibited for flow.
And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you stop over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not solidified firmly; and roughly, if you make a cut all in one go.
May who wants to improve the phlebotomy of that one on the left hand, is that it is referred to the blood vessels on one's own body.
And do likewise in phlebotomy of this one with milk as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy is to the blood vessels that are in the departure of the body, as well as the benefits of milk, and the holding of menstruation, and the benefits of the palms and ulcers of the skin and ancient veins, and their resemblance to the benefits.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient puts his neck in cold water and rubs it on that one until the veins appear; and place it over the joint of the neck with a certain bandage; and the location of the vein is clearly visible, and from that one branches are made on the face of the neck.
And so he will make a wide loop with the rope or let the loop hang down from the neck of the animal, because it is better and more effective this way, since it gives him more freedom to move.
And if he cuts it on the foot's face, then you must be careful not to cut the nerves that run through it, and pause your cutting at this place, as if you were going to cut it in half.
Then let his feet rest.
But if the patient's foot must be raised, then you will repeat the operation on his foot in water and let the fluid run off in that place where it has been evacuated.
And if the cutter has made a mistake in the first cut, then repeat the cutting on it a little bit, because the place is small; and don't worry about hurting him, but be careful not to cut the nerves as we have said before.
And apparently you will wrap the other foot around it.
And from the sciatic vein, the place where we have spoken before must be left hanging from the side of the leg where the patient's hernia is.
And the stretching of his feet during the cutting of him is done at the hip when it is cut from the tail.
And the quality of the cutting of him is that the patient goes into water, and quickly and strongly stretch his foot from the neck of the hernia with four thin pieces of rope, because you can't see it unless it's wet.
And so when it appears, then you will cut it with the second cut that is possible and second in length, and it is better; or you will cut it with a cutting or you will break it with a breaking, because the place is small.
And this is a small animal that walks on its toes; and if you notice it, and it doesn't appear clearly to the touch, then cut one of its legs, and it is that which appears at the back of the foot instead of the little finger and the middle finger.
And be careful not to cut the nerves, and let the fluid run off in the amount you want.
Then return it to its tightness and place it over the site of the cutting with a little pressure, because it will heal well.
Of wind and of the qualities of using those.
For wind and for corns, or for earache, or for vertigo.
And there are two ways to treat wind: one is by cutting and removing the fluid, and another is by massaging and stimulating it.
And this type of wind treatment, which is done by massage, has two ways: either it' s hot or it' s cold.
And for wind treatments that are done by cutting and removing the fluid there are twelve places on the body, of which the last is behind the head, and the first is at the tip of the skull; and another in front of the jaw, leaving it between the teeth; and another above the brow bone; and another in the middle of the forehead; and another in the lower part of the eye; and another on the outer corner of the eye; and another on the inner corner of the eye; and another on the ear; and two at the neck.
And wind treatment doesn' t come from large veins in the flesh, and it isn' t effective for this type of wind that comes from an empty place inside the body, but only from a small vessel; nor does it come from fire or cold that is done to a disease by filling it up.
But if necessity demands wind treatment for illness or constant pain, then give it at the beginning of the meal and at its end; and in the middle of it as well.
So if it happens in any of these causes, especially if it is at the third or sixth hour of the day, then order wind treatment to be done rather than wait for a few more hours.
And good wind treatment for the neck is that when it raises the weight on the head and it falls into the throat; but be careful not to evacuate the whole body with it.
And this type of wind treatment is in the place of cutting the head.
And it' not useful for using water that is used for scrubbing, or that is used for catarrh, because it causes a great problem.
And with that water it isn' t useful for treating the old diseases, and in the skulls where there are chronic pains.
But to those who are treated with wind treatment that is continuous on them, they become forgetful; and with water it is harmful for this purpose.
But wind treatment with alcohol is done in the place of cutting the blood vessel and the throat; and with it you give breath, and constriction to the throat, and splitting the instrument of breathing, and coughing, and swelling.
And with a little bit of alcohol in the wind treatment, because if it is stopped halfway, it weakens the body and the stomach.
And with wind treatment with alcohol, you give relief to headaches and eye pain, and to migraine, and to feverishness, and to pains in the teeth; and it is done in the place of cutting the throat.
And be careful that the wind treatment doesn' t press too hard so as not to cut the artery and cause a rush of blood.
And wind treatment that is given to the jaw gives alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases to those that are in the mouth, and they are done by cutting the other way instead of this way.
But wind treatment that is done on the two spatulas causes hair loss, which is caused by heat.
And wind treatment that is done on the inside of the two brasses gives you life by cutting three small veins, for one is in the base of the skull, another is in the forehead, and another is in the neck; because those small vessels are more effective than the large ones within the body, so the blood flows to them.
And order the wind treatment not to cut it in the form of cutting, because the place is exposed; and leave it away from its nerves and arteries.
And this type of wind treatment is done on the feet and it gives you hemorrhoids in the anus, and ulcers.
And order the wind treatment to be powerful, and that it' s done by earache, because the place is small for a strong cutting; and do not make it too gentle with the cutting.
But small wind treatment by a small movement, because it makes the blood run throughout the body, and causes old pains in the chest and in the mother, and in the bladder; and it causes menstruation, and gives pain to both breasts and to the udder; and it is done by cutting two toes, and cutting two nails, and cutting two cavities.
However, they do not heal the whole body and cause fainting in men.
And from the wind, when it is strong, a breath of two blankets is sufficient for cooling.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that you pause the wind at the beginning to see and suck up wetness quickly, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but rather pause it gently, and hold it carefully, and let the humors come to the place by arrival slowly. And do not repeat this water and continue inside until you see the place turn red and swell and the pain of the saint appear.
Then scrub and repeat the liquid little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of the bodies.
Whose meat is rotten from within, cover it so that you scrub it once and do not push it further, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And order the wind to amplify the scrubbing and make it a little less, and easily carry away the liquid.
And if the saint is thick, then cover it so that you scrub two times, because in the first scrubbing the way of subtilization to the saint and the liquid of him is opened. But in the second for the acquired scrutinization of the gross extraction of the saint.
And if the saint is very foul, then make scrubbing in the third time so that it achieves the last.
Finally, when we want to extract a little or a bit of the saint, one scrubbing is enough for us.
And if we want to extract one saint, make a deep scrubbing; and if we know that the saint is thick, then cover it with a thick scrubbing.
And the term of scrubbing in which the depth of the wound is only one.
And if that from which the wound is thick, hard, rough, and the pores of it are tight, open, and resolute; if it is in summer, then oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of amaryllis, or oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter, then oil of thyme, or oil of St. John's wort, and such like.
And if the superfluity is thick and frizzly, then make the oil be sweet-smelling, or oil of myrrh, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and such like.
But if the wind-machine has wide pores and is prone to oil, then cover those places of the wind-machine with its own oil, and make the wind blow with a thin water of vinegar, or with water of chamomile, or with water of thyme; and similar things to those.
And if that from which the saint is of a moist humidity, clean your wind-machine with a thin water of honey, or with water of mulberry and sumach; and similar things to those.
And if the superfluities are thick, then clean your wind-machine with a strong water of mint, or with water of fennel, which is marjoram, or with a decoction of anise, or chamomile; and similar things to those.
And that the wind is kept before a bath; and let it be administered close to the moment of the bath for an hour or two, and let him sleep next to the wind.
What is needed so that the person who is being wound-up is held by a phlebotomist before wound-up?
And consider at the beginning: then if the wind-machine or that which is to be bled is coleric and blows on the blood and inflammation, then take things that cool, such as milk of roses, and water of fennel and lettuce, and secanbin, and julep, and similar things.
And pause their feedings such as porridge, and meat of fowl birds, and prepared foods with flavor, and similar things to those.
And if that from which the complex is frizzly, then take in drinking sweet syrup, or syrup of licorice with seeds, and sumac, and a little odorant between vinegar and salt; and let it be forbidden to drink much, and pause his feedings of porridge and cannabis and ales, and peters, and pet birds.
And that on the day of wind-up and bleeding the water is greater than the food.
And that is given in water to some men of bitter-almond syrup, or medicine of musk, which is musk, before wind-up or bleeding, or close to it, so that the main members are comfortable and the saint is subtilized; and do not take those cuts.
And the winds that have only one scrubbing are paused over their heads, and on their feet and toes, and on the navel, because those members do not suffer scrubbing on themselves.
And it is not desired in those but a attraction of the saint from a member, such as if wind pauses over a breast in malacia of the flow of the saint from the saint's navel; and use that for which the member becomes dissolved and softens it, and puts it off to one side and keeps away from it, because it resolves the wind.
And already is paused over the cheeks when it happens in their falling or rain, because of the virtue of a strong attraction that brings up the falling and eliminates the rain from its place.
And it seems like when it is paused over the breast and navel, therefore a wind-up happens in those enclosed.
And these winds are given with water only; and some are given with milk.
And some are given full of cold water in the malacia of the navel.
And water is for the wind to be filled and be large, it is only cold water or water in which herbs are cut for water.
Form of wind-up given with fire: let the width of the orifice be two fingers wide, second that we have formed it; and the quantity of the water is half a palm; and be in the middle of it, in the place that is in the circuit, most of it, the needle is small according to the quantity that enters it.
Let it be made of a little salt and citrus, of large edges, lion, hernia, and third for that the member does not keep its position over it.
And be at the middle of it a transverse bar of iron or salt, where it is paused with fire.
And already is this great wind-up from that which we have spoken of; and the little less from that, according to the malacities and the state of that which uses it.
And the winds of the sick and exhausted are other than the winds of young people and large bodies.
And the quality of pausing this wind with fire on the member is that it extend the bar of iron a little before a small candle of wax, and pause that one over the middle of the transverse bar in the place of the wind-up, so that the fire does not burn the body of the patient.
And then pause it over the member of the patient, and place the needle that we have said, before which we do not hold the wind-up, and keep the fire burning above that needle, then let the wind-up be dissolved.
And you light the fire according to their way, and return to that if they are not satisfied with this.
May it be given in a vessel of clay for washing, not made with a transverse rim or handle, but to be filled with water, and placed on the limb only.
And this is the form of it: And this vessel is the better, the larger it is, so that it can receive a great amount of water.
Chapter .xciii.
Sanguineous substances are not administered in full limbs but in the limbs where it is not possible to place vessels, because of their smallness, so that they can be applied with the nose and the tongue; or on a naked limb, when applied with the nose and mouth, or else.
And the quality of using those that you have found to be bloody ones that are in water full of mud.
And let them be laid down for the day and night in water full of mud until they are no longer hungry, so that it does not cause any trouble in the patient's stomach; and then let them be evacuated with a flood of blood and with vessels; and then rub the limb with the hand until it turns red; and then let them be placed.
And when they are filled up, and case.
And if it is possible to draw off the liquid from the place with a vessel, it is better to do so after dinner.
But if not, then wash the place with vinegar and immediately pour on water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the patient's condition persists for a long time, and the blood remains, then put a cloth over it in boiling water, and place that on it until the residue is removed.
And if the sickness persists, then sprinkle over it vitriol trissulated, or yolks of eggs and their yolks as they are for stinging causes, until the sickness is gone; or let them be placed on the place beans boiled in water, and let them be laid down until the beans stick to the place, and the sickness is gone.
And finally, if necessary, a second application of blood-suckers, when it is possible to change those.
And if blood-suckers are prohibited by suspension, then rub the place with fresh blood or place an awl in the places until the sickness comes; and then let them be placed, for those when they feel any sickness will come immediately.
And when you want to make them drop down, sprinkle over them a little of allspice trissulated, or salt, or ash, and sometimes often.
Thus begins the treatment for the third time: for restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is for restoring a fracture and an accidental dislocation in the bones.
Now, son you aware that the foolish doctors and the common practitioners and those who at any time have not regarded the free ones of the Ancient ones or read a letter from them?
And for this reason the method of the wise ones has been forbidden on our land; and I have not forgotten it at all in any time through all the books of the Ancient ones and my study on their understanding, until I drew out science from them.
And then I began to do experiments and studies in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that relates to my science and on which the greatest experiment was made; for it is appropriate that this should be renewed by you and taken away from the occupation of elaborating; and it is also a renewal for me at the end of elaborating; and it has shown me in the end of declaration; and I have formed it out of the form of the instruments that are administered in this, through the addition of declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Chapter one.
First of all, let us discuss the different types of fractures of bones, for which a necessary premise exists before we begin to reminisce about the members that have been broken and are different in each one. And let us therefore say in the proem of this chapter the sum of the speech; and the chapters for understanding those, at the beginning, will certainly be the artisans and stand on the veracity of those; so it is you and those who are eager to learn or study this noble art from others.
And let me say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or displacement occurs, then I will go at the beginning to bloodletting or poulticing that person, or any time, if you do not prohibit any cause, as with the healing of virtue, or that to which it has happened, or old age, or time of intense heat, or intense cold.
And then let it be put in a diet of fresh herbs and meat of geese and crayfish; and prohibit meat that is fatty and fill it with a diet that fills the veins with blood, unless you are certain that an apoplexy will come; and if you do not fear emission of material into the limb.
And then return the patient to his regular regime first, by which he usually walks.
And let the broken bone begin to be restored, then I will say that the patient is fed with nutritious foods of flour mixed with water, and raw, and beans, and peas, and chickens, and fish, and sweet, and thick, and similar to those; and it is in this diet that coagulations of fractures are made gently and easily.
And know that the bones break in those who are in their early years and in their decrepitude, it is not possible that they will continue to be sustained and will be consolidated according to their nature by the drying up of the limbs.
However, nature adjusts and adheres to the broken bone throughout the whole story in any cause that is similar to a glut in which there is thickness that clings and strengthens it within itself until it comes to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, unless there is a cause that prohibits this from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary to pause the meals of the patient, in meals where there is thickness and viscosity and richness, as I have said.
And know that the types of fractures are different according to the variety of limbs, for a fracture in the bone of the neck is different from a fracture in the bone of the head; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the leg bone; and resembling, all the other limbs are different from each other.
And I have already described the entire species of fractures, separated in a separate chapter from the other.
A variety of fractures within themselves. And the types of fractures in their bones are different; for an arco-shaped fracture occurs in the stars; and some are broken according to the length of the bone: and those are broken with pain and dislocation at the head, and a small fracture occurs.
And to all species is added a punishment or torment in the restoration of them according to that which will come; remember the distinction of them in their places.
This is a diagnosis of a broken bone. And this is the description of a broken bone: it is a twisted shape, and from that prominence and appearance, and from it when you press it with your hand.
And so when it is not in the twisted place that appears nor below is made any movement with the touch and the patient does not suffer great pain, then there is no fracture here.
While it is possible that it is a twist or a small crack, then do not move your hand around and press down on it with your hand so that you can feel it, and at the same time, pause for a moment; then, if necessary, make it tighter with a thin string.
And you know that the place where it is arched and does not split into two or another part, then that does not cause a sudden change; when it has been completely straightened out from its curve, then begin to correct it little by little, so that with a sudden change, a puss forms on it.
And if, with the sudden change, a puss forms on it, then let that be for several days until the pus stops; and at the same time, remove it in any way you can by levitation or engineering.
And know that the restoration of its shape and the tightening of it is lighter than the bone where such a sudden change occurs.
Then strengthen that second one that will come when you remember it.
And if in the bone there are two parts separated from each other, then it is necessary to remove this damaged limb entirely, if it is the arm or the leg; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
And place it in the position where you pause the limb that is bent according to its natural shape, while the parts that are separated from the bent limb are extended, then know that you should pierce those parts with a needle and thread them together in any way you can.
And be careful that, with your operation or injury, nothing happens to the patient's back; and pierce yourself in accordance with your power that you apply one bone to another in any of its shapes.
Then, when you can take advantage of touching your hand, and if there is no other cause, correct it and close it up with the quantity of your skill.
And cause a violent extension and compression to occur, so that with it, certain metzes that are seen to cause the pus to form on the bone because of its operation, or that cause a contraction in the limb when they see water for the operation of their metzes.
And the quality of the tightening of the limb is that which I recommend to you; so that you know that bent limbs are varied in their smallness and their size and the shape of those.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and the leg, so that their wrapping is made of a very thin cloth.
And for those that are large, such as the thigh or chest, so that in those there is a wrapping of both sides and it is tightly bound together, so that when it is not wrapped properly, it can become distorted; and if there is a gap between the wrapping and the limb, then it will cause an injury.
Then begin to correct it, and take care with your hand when you do so, so that the fracture is in the middle of those three wrappings or four, according to how much the limb needs; and strengthen your hand a little on the limb.
Then pause at the top of the place where the fracture is, and tighten your hand that doesn'y slip; then strengthen the place where you have tightened it. Then stretch that limb out slightly with the wrapping at the fracture's place, and make the tightening lighter little by little until you feel a strong part of it.
Then take another object and wrap it around that bent part with the wrapping, and pause at the top of the place where the fracture is; then make the first wrapping lighter on the limb; and perform your operation on the tightening of the second wrapping.
Then pause between the wrappings with a piece of cloth or leather so that the twist in the fracture is corrected if there is any; and if not, do not stop for any reason.
Then pause on another object, and stretch those wrappings over it with care so that they do not tear, if there is no swelling or pus at the fracture, then pause on water to ease the swelling; and let those be for a few days; and then tighten your hand on them.
And let the length of each strap be different from each other, and form it well; or let it be made of bamboo, or of palm branches; and make the width of each strap according to this shape and figure:
However, know that the strap placed over that fracture is thicker and wider a little than the other straps, and let the length of the strap according to how long it needs to be in order to reach the limb's magnitude and smallness; then tighten your hand on those straps with another object, as I have described for tightening; and make this tight so that it does not slip; and if necessary, add a piece of cloth or leather over it to keep it in place.
And know that the strings should be of average thickness and soft; and if they are thick, as I have seen through the operation of some foolish metzes where they were paused with those same strings of leather, it is a great mistake, since it catches the string in place and tears it; and if they are too thin, then their knot will not be secure.
And fine strings are not convenient either, because you will not be able to tighten them with those; and if there is a gap between one strap and another, then there will be half a string.
And if the patient is held between the extremities of the straps and their tightening in those places, then pause a little further away from that piece of leather or rope with which you are holding him so that it doesn'y cause him any injury.
And some fractures are due to bad luck, and the dislocation occurs in the joint, and I have a memory of that one in the Capitol according to its uniqueness.
And know that any damaged limb is not right to be stretched with the straps on the first day; and this cause is because the limb, when it is large, does not stop pausing over the straps until three or seven days have passed, according to your security of the coming pus.
And this is the way of those who have been injured by impact and dislocation and twisting.
And a way of embowelling that is like a shower of restoration from a fracture, and more complicated for the females and children, because it is water that comes out over which no heat is felt nor dust; and this is because you take flour powder, and this is the flour's medulla that runs in the mill when the millstone moves in the mill's parts.
And let it be cooked like that, unless you want to chop it finely with a knife, and do not make the mixture too thin or too dense; and use it quickly.
Other way of applying plaster to restore fracture and dislocation and twists: Take assafetida, myrrh, acacia, fennel, and anise, which is called Salvage, all within one dragon; myrrh and aloes within five dragons; alochile within six dragons; all are boiled and ground with water of milk or white of egg if the patient's composition is scorched; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives life to a hundred men.
Another way of applying plaster to cure fracture and twists: Take a handful of white rose within one dragon; myrrh and aloes within five dragons; acacia within six dragons; and armecene within xx dragons.
All of these three things are to be finely chopped in a mortar, and mixed with water or garlic juice, and used.
A way of treating joint and bone pain due to different causes, such as injuries and fractures: take sheep's wool, immerse it in wine and oil, and place it on the affected area.
May be this ointment does not have the power of healing, to stop a cold sweat, and to drive away pains properly.
Another way of treating broken bones: take leaves of the fig tree and leaves of the poppy, and grind them together to make an ointment. Apply it as needed.
A way of preparing a fresh ointment to restore broken bones and to drive away a cold sweat: take roots of alfalfa, of chamomile and violets, of barley flour, and of all the rest. Grind them together with water; then add honey and butter. All of these three things are to be finely chopped in a mortar if the member is not bleeding.
If it is bleeding, then cook it with water from coriander or use the same water.
Another way of treating a persistent cold sweat, when it occurs, is to make an ointment with roots of alfalfa and senf, and marjoram, violets, chamomile, and all the rest; all of these things are finely chopped in a mortar with water from sage or double water or wine, depending on the member's condition and the amount of rest required.
May be Ypocras does not cause any harm when applied to a broken limb, but rather does good if it is made of wax and oil, and not for any other reason; and remember that it must be fine in consistency, neither too thin nor too dense.
May be Gualia is fine that it is applied to the broken limb does good to restore it and causes in which there is dryness with small amount of quality so as garlic, onions and resembling those causes that we have recommended.
A way of treating injuries and pain: take milk, dried dates, hair of a man (shaved), and althaa, and salt, all ground together in a mortar; grind them finely, and make an ointment.
May be the quantity depends on the pain and the amount of rest required; if there is no pain or trouble caused by the injury, and the bone is not broken or it hurts in its place, then you do not need to apply this ointment. And if there is pain or trouble at the site, intense pain or swelling, then you cover it with a cloth or bandage, and apply this ointment after that.
And take a cloth of linen and sea sponge, wet with water, and dip the cloth in wine, and place it on the affected area until the swelling and pain stop; then let the member rest for an hour; then apply a fresh cloth dipped in wine and oil or rose oil, and place it on top for an hour; then check for any evidence of cold sweat, and let the member rest.
Then repeat that process gently and frequently, and apply this ointment with small amount to the affected area until it is healed.
And if the cold sweat, pain and swelling, and all these accidents have already been treated with this ointment and you do not feel any relief from it, then repeat applying it frequently until you feel relief.
And if there is no cause for those injuries that I have mentioned; then do not apply this ointment unless three days or four or five or seven have passed. and some are left for 20 days according to what we have said, until the fracture heals, and if there is no pain or trouble; then place a cloth dipped in vinegar on top of it.
Then adjust the pressure more than in your first attempt, and adjust it according to the thickening of the patient' water; since the memory of it follows.
May be if the site of the fracture is drying out and becoming thinner more than what it should, then know that nutrition will not reach it; and therefore, dip it in water to restore it completely; and do so for three days; and ease a little pressure on it; and through this process, the member receives nutrition, and heals gently.
May be if the site of the fracture is restored completely by what we have mentioned above, and it is not restored at first attempt, according to what covers it; and restore it according to its tortuosity, as an error in their operation, and a great fear, and if it is a dry bone, then it grows larger in its free area, and turns around with water.
I have not seen anything about this, so it is more reasonable to believe that it does not.
Capitol according to what we have mentioned above: Of the fracture when it occurs at the top of the head.
The fractures are diverse, and the causes are different, since one fracture can be caused by a blow from a stone, and another can be caused by the stone hitting the bone inside the box, which breaks the bone, or by a blow that does not hit the bone but hits the flesh behind it; and this type of fracture is called a total dislocation.
And the pain of these two fractures is great or slight, and the fracture causes contraction or extension; and its cause is a blow from rain or hitting the ground while standing.
And this fracture is penetrative, which means it passes through the skin of the pannicum; or it occurs on the face of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or slight.
And one fracture is that it is absorbed by the bone, in the subtlety of the hair of the finger, and through this process, this type of fracture is called capillary.
And this is a fracture that occurs from hitting the ground or from a blow, and it looks like it; which makes a part of the bone break into its hollow space, and break at the base of the finger bones.
And most often it is done on the bones of the skeleton, as well as when they are covered with flesh.
And in all these species of fractures it is necessary to put them together, and in doing so the bones must be separated. Then I was filled with horror at all this in its place.
And so I examine all these kinds of fractures by touch, and by inspection and by the smell of rotten flesh that is on them.
And the special kind of bone that is known by this, which is discovered on the bone, and is washed, and is dried out, for the fracture looks black.
But in the treatment of fractures consider the beginning of the patient's illness, and if you see by clear evidence that it means pain, such as vomiting with cholera, ekstasis, loss of reason, delirium, and fainting, high fever, and the appearance of blisters on them, and similar symptoms to those of the major disorders, then do not treat them as if they were cured.
And if you hope for a cure from non-curable illnesses, then begin the patient's treatment.
The cause is because if it has come to you with the plague in its beginning and it has come on the fourth day of winter, then know that you should study the treatment of the bone before the twelfth day according to all the dispositions.
And if it is in the summer days, then know that you should treat the bone before the seventh day, because after that the bone has been corrupted by putrefaction, and those symptoms happen that have been recommended.
And if the fracture has already reached the neck of the bone, and is very small and broken, then know that you should cut it off according to what I have recommended to you.
And know that if the patient's head is infected, and you discover on the bone according to custom and the way I have described it, and it is light on the head, then treat it.
And if it happens to you that the bone is discovered, fluxes of blood or pus come out by cautery, then pause and wait for the pus to dry up, and make sure that the flux of blood stops; and then begin to treat the bone and to remove it.
Then it is according to one of two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you cut the bone with a sharp knife, and this is how it is done: And then apply another knife to it, a little sharper than that one; and this is how it is done:
Then apply the second knife, which is even sharper.
Then you need to name various knives, some of which are sharper than others; and some of them are thinner than others, and of sharp-edged metal.
And use them with ease in striking the knife to avoid hurting yourself.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then know that you should pierce it before administrating the knives, naming them not deep knives.
And they are not named in the same way because those do not stop the term of the bone's end at water that is next to it, for its round edge or margin over it prevents it from being submerged and passing into the bone's substance.
And it is convenient that you take many of these knives, each for a different bone's substance, within which the end of the head bone is acute, and its length and brevity are according to the amount of its substance.
And this is the form of three kinds of knives: The quality of piercing in the bone's circuit is that you place the knife on the bone and turn it with the pins, within which you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then move the knife to another location, and pause at that point where all the thickness of the edge or around it.
Then cut with the knife between any part of the bone and make it very small so that you can lift it up by levitation, as we have said, within which you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other instrument that you will prepare for water, also with tweezers and forceps that are small.
And know that you keep the knife away from any cause of the patient' cause.
And then, when you have finished circumcising the bone, separate it from the body if it continues to hang; then extract it, knowing that you place it in the roughness of the water where it is on the bone and another instrument that resembles a knife, but much sharper and smaller than the others.
And if any part of the small bones remains, then do so easily with water that you have from the instruments; and then clean it thoroughly with lilac and wash those that we have recommended.
And the other way of operation is light, far from fear, which says: It is necessary for you at first to begin to discover the part of the bone where the most violent and clear fracture has occurred, within which, when you have discovered that part, you will pause on it with a very sharp knife that is not too thick, and this is how it is done:
And that the sharp part is on both sides before it in length, and sometimes also in width, and that the sharp part be fitted to the body by turning the sharp edge of the knife towards the bone.
Then hit the knife with a light blow on one side of a small part until it is completely cut through all the bone, and if you are sure that there is no blood coming out from it in any way, and if it was a man, then certainly, and if it was a woman, then probably.
And if it happens to you that there is no part of the bone in contact with the body where the fracture occurs, then cut that part with a sharp knife, and release this one with ease, for it is released from the body without injury or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the body, and that which has been cut off or is left on the bone is the edge of it, and it remains in its sharp and thin parts, then know that you should remove those edges and sharp parts with a very small knife, according to what you have prepared the number, of different quantities for you to be able to administer those in any location convenient for you.
And know that you administer to yourself the most sharp of these knives at the beginning of the operation, and then use the smallest of them, and do not stop until you have reached the point where it is necessary to administrate the most small and the most sharp of all.
Then for any of the small fractures of hair or fine bone fractures, know that you treat it according to what you have discovered in its location.
And this is because it is not done equally with all those who have studied in that field. And he writes to us, showing in great detail the fractures.
And if the pannicol is rectangular when you extract the bone, then know that you take a cloth according to the amount of the plague, and submerge it in rose water, and pause it over the opening of the plague; then take another folded or triple cloth, and submerge it in rose water, and pause it over the first one, and make it very small on it as much as possible without hurting the body; and then administer on it a thin cloth, and do not tighten it except by the amount of the plague only.
And leave him alone on this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the apoplexy; and then, after that, administer to him medicines which do not lack salt, as well as rusk and flour, and the dust of almonds and aristolochia, and similar things.
And if you make of these medicines a powder, which is powdered over the skin, when it is dry; and in general, administer to him all medicine of its properties that he should not drink or chew it.
And you should guard carefully that the plague in your treatment is pure; and it is not in a paste of ointment or any other; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is applied to the skin of the brain, it corrupts and destroys it, and comes to the patient's throat, and there is evil and malice.
And it happens in the top of the head, when it is thoroughly washed and more so when the treatment is removed from him, and its surface is blacker; then consider afterwards whether it is that the patient has those accidents which we have said, you will know that it is dangerous altogether.
And if it is not black only because of the medicine that is applied to it, and if that blackness comes from the virtue of that medicine; then you should know that you take honey with some rose water. iii. and you put a cloth on them, and then place it over the top; and then treat them with the medicine which is suitable for them until they are cured.
Chapter. iii.
Of restoring a broken nose.
You should know that the nose is not broken except by two bones put together, or one of those cartilage pieces, because both bones are there; for the piece which is broken is cartilaginous, and it is not broken but becomes sharp and twisted and ugly.
Maybe if one of the two pieces is broken, then you should know that you introduce the little finger into the nose, and fit that fracture from within with the little bone, and push it outside; so that the nose returns to its natural shape. Do it easily for you, and know that you do not hurt those patients with your operation on their throats.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not come to that, then make it equal with the end of the bone where there is a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two pieces, then you should make the appearance of that one.
And take care of it in the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and otherwise, then let the seventh or tenth day pass before you treat it for the apoplexy.
Then introduce in the end of the nose a piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two thin pieces, if the fracture is in two parts; and let it be of such a thickness as to fill the width of the nose.
And I say of the ancient restoring things that the pieces should be wrapped in a cloth, and they should be changed every day; but I have not seen it; only know that the piece is wrapped in cotton wool with powder; and then leave it until the bone has stopped moving and the cartilage has hardened.
And some are put together in the nose instead of one piece, unless it is wrapped in a cloth; and let it be that the fracture has already been made more violent, and that breathing is not prevented by the patient.
This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, make it one piece, and if you want, make two pieces.
And if another apoplexy comes; apply the nose with wax or with a paste of vinegar and rose water, or with diazonium sulfate.
Maybe if no apoplexy comes; then you should know that you apply it outside with the flour of sizami and the dust of elderberries and the albumen of egg; and let it rest on top of a cloth, and do not put the nose in any cause.
Maybe if the bones of the nose are broken or cracked; then you should know that you cut them apart, and take out those which are broken with an instrument suitable for those; and then sew up the wound, and treat it with water which is warm and solid, and apply with wax to it.
And if you have plague inside the nose; then you should know that you treat it with one piece and administer a pipe of lead until it is completely healed.
Chapter. iv.
Of restoring the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not caused by plague; then consider whether it is only at one end that it is broken, and if it is curved to the pieces inside, the knowledge of it is limited.
And then, if the fracture is on the right side, introduce the little finger of the left hand into the patient' s mouth; and seemingly, if the fracture is on the left side, then introduce the little finger of the right hand; and push it outside with ease at the ends, with your other hand at the end which is broken; and make it equal with that end.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts; then you should administer extension of two pieces according to right angles so that the equality of it is possible.
And if there is a concussion of the teeth and a disruption; then strengthen those which you hope will remain, with wire of gold or silver or cedar; and place them on the broken jaw with wax, and place over it a double cloth, and place a single cloth above it; and place over that a star-shaped piece of linen nicely made, or a chain of one length along the length of it; and then treat it as if it were bound up, until it is not destroyed.
And order the patient to use rest and quietness, and pause their food of hot drinks.
And if you suspect that the shape has already been changed in some way; then take care of it and leave it for three days; and then correct it which has already been changed and apply wax to it, with powder or flour, because you will have taken off the cloth from it, and place over it a piece of wool.
And then, when that is annexed, adjust the wax which has been applied to it, and the disposition of the bone is not changed, leave it alone until it is healed and strengthen the fracture; because you have seen this fracture in three weeks.
And if another apoplexy comes; then administer water which has been boiled with the herbs we have said, until it is healed, and then treat the apoplexy.
And if the fracture is caused by plague; then consider whether it is a big piece or a little one; then you should know that you move those little pieces with water which moves them in the movement of those instruments.
And if the orifice of the plague is straight; then you should know that you amplify it with a needle according to the quantity of your need.
Then when you have moved those little pieces; and if there is a big hole; then sew it up with the thread which has been boiled, and then treat the hole with water which is warm.
Chapter. v.
Of restoring the forehead when it is broken.
The bone is broken by twisting the furcula from in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than the injuries that occur in them; and it is easier to restore them; or they are so injured that they separate them, and it is difficult to restore them; or they are so injured that the fracture is a painful one.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is a painful one, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has an aid and keeps the broken bone steady, and the other extends the loop over that break.
Then bring the fracture close to your body so that its shape is determined according to how it curves, and not in a small eminence or concave area.
And if you need to extend it more, then cover that break with a piece of cloth or wool, and make the size large enough according to your need; and spread out and raise the furcula and wrap it with your hand so that you bring the fracture close according to how it curves.
And if you cannot bring the end of the furcula to the outside breaks, since it reaches the chin, then cover that break with a cushion placed on its neck, and place another smaller one under the muscle.
And the minister press the muscle on the patient's thighs so that the bone of the furcula is raised up to reach its chin, and then you correct the fracture and bring it close according to how it curves.
Or if you feel pain from the furcula and it is a little painful, then cover that break and cut off those parts with ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you invent a sharp tool from it that you have placed aside the furcula, as you have placed your hand on the break; and this tool is of wood or iron, and this is its shape:
And it seems like a vessel from which this is the concave part; and its width should be according to the water that you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Or the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that there are two ends like this, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the break from which you have cut off the injury is wide, and it is certain that a poultice will help heal it, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the break is small, or you fear that it will not heal with a poultice, then you use cloth and powder according to the quantity of the wound's lip.
And if it is so that it will not heal with a poultice, then pour wine and rose oil in a cloth, and place it over that.
And altogether, so that the pole does not hurt the broken bone; and every day, when the joint becomes softer or you see that the pole has already been loosened, then you correct it and tighten the binding.
And place the patient' sleep on his neck, and place a small cushion under it to raise its head a little; so that the support for it is raised from the neck of him, and then the fracture of the furcula is raised higher than the muscle; or the arms of him are tied to the pole.
Do not remove the joint if it does not hurt you immediately, nor does it cause pain in the place immediately; until twelve days have passed.
And then renew the paste if you have seen the face of it in water, and adjust its tightness and restore that one, so that it is restored and its fracture is congealed; and place a cloth over that break.
And it is strengthened and supported according to the month in 28 days, and in some cases it is made in a month of time from him.
Chapter VI.
The Restoration of a Shoulder Fracture.
A tart with a spatula is broken in the location below the shoulder, and not broken from the shoulder itself but from the edges.
And when it is broken from the location below the shoulder - and it is broken from the middle of the shoulder - and is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture you prepare it and reduce that according to the natural shape in any way that you can imagine; and here is how you do that:
And then cover that location with flour and egg white, and place a cloth on the pole; and place another cloth on the table according to the quantity of the spatula; all or a little.
Or if the pole is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you bring that concave part close with egg white, and place the pole according to equality.
And then tighten it very well with a long hand of rope and by holding the pole tight, so that it does not come apart from its place.
Consider the joint every day; and altogether, if it becomes softer, then loosen it again and tighten it if it has already come apart from its place.
And beat the patient on his back with a cloth.
And the spatula is restored in 20 or 25 days.
And when that number is complete, then you dissolve the binding, and may your hand be certain that it is one of the bones whose beginning is not painful and its end also.
And if you press on the broken bone's location and put a cloth aside it, then you cut it apart, and place it away; and do as we said in the fracture of the furcula with poultice to heal it quickly if you need it.
Chapter VII.
The Restoration of a Foot Fracture.
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle of it and that is a hard break; or the ends of it are broken and those are cut up, like cicadas.
And from the accidents of the foot when it is broken that part declines inside and there is a pain in it, and difficulty in walking, and strong beating and vomiting; and it is declared in its cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on his back, and a cushion placed between his thighs; then press the muscles of him, and adjust his ribs according to the size of two ribs, and carefully do the operation and reduce that according to how it curves, so that its shape is determined according to what is possible for you, and return it to its figure according to how it was before.
Here is the translation of the text:
And if necessity causes the dislocation of that, or pruritus, or pain, or edema that occurs in the place, then you tie it and loosen it and remove the poultice and correct what happens to it by means of cure; and let him reduce the poultice, if sometimes he makes it wet; and adjust the stricture until it is healed.
Chapter .viii.
On the Restoration of Fractures When They Are Broken.
You should know that a rib fracture occurs only in two places, from the top or bottom, and from these does not come into contact with the other until they are very close; and of the ends of them, from where they depart, comes into contact with the others by means of cartilage. And do not hide your knowledge from inquiry about it, as you say.
And the restoration be thus that it joins the fracture by means of what is possible, taking into account where it is covered, and let him poultice and tighten the broken bone with a bandage, if you fear for it.
And if the rib fracture is declining towards the top or bottom, then severe pain and puncturing occurs in the patient, as well as what happens to him when he has wept, and because of this the bone is covered with a veil; and difficulty in healing, coughing, and vomiting by reason of the wind; and this is a difficult cure.
And the Ancients have devised such things for it.
And of them it is said: "Cover the patient's food so that it does not cause inflammation and wind, so that the abdomen is swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven towards the outside joints."
Let us avoid that for us not to be a cause of lightheadedness to generate edema from the poultice, unless it happens; and if it already happens, then help is on its way.
And they say of them that it should be stopped from being windy and that it should be drunk with strength; and it is similar to reasoning, but it is more feared that the wind will throw away the superfluity to the place because of its weakness.
And they say of them: "Cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in oil, and let powders be placed between the ribs until it is filled up, which is a binding bandage when you have wrapped it up according to its roundness; and let the patient be cured with the cure of pleurisy from food and medicine."
And if violent constriction causes the patient pain, and the bone is covered with a veil due to itching, they fear for the patient, then let them break open that place, uncover the rib fracture, and remove it with difficulty; and let me engrave the bone with ease, and extract it.
And let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a burn, and let us bind that one with poultices until it is healed.
And if edema occurs inside, then you tie it and place powders of rose oil on the place, and let it be cured with water that covers the edema inside.
And let it be raised up above the bed where it sleeps, until it is healed.
Chapter .ix.
On the Restoration of a Fracture in the Vertebral Column of the Back and Neck.
Some veins break the bones of the neck, and similarly to those of the back. And if you want to know whether it will be healed or not with water, consider that, since sometimes the muscles of those are softened and stupified and dead and cannot move or extend or tighten those, and when you squeeze them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, they do not feel pain in them; then you should know that it will not be healed, and, in their disposition, it is deadly.
And if those muscles ache and feel constriction when you touch them or prick them with a needle, then you should know that the spine of the bone is saved, and that the patient is being cured.
And if you see how similar the spines of the neck are to water, and want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
And if you see that they are already softened, then it happens to them with water that happens in the most cases, and when you get on their back, there is windiness and defecation according to their will; and some cover their back with their hand, and urinate, and cannot; then you should know that it is deadly, and do not treat him.
But if any of those causes does not happen, the cause is better and less harmful.
And the patient' cure is that you pierce into the edema of the poultice that you pause over the vertebral column behind a rose oil, or with a herb of garlic; pause over that one for a few moments until it is sedated.
And then he places a comfortable poultice on it, and tightens it with a bandage; and command the patient not to move or sleep on the broken part until it is healed.
And if the vertebral bone is broken or some other cause has separated it from itself, then let him be cut off above that, and let him be joined with a nail; and let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a sutura; and let us cure that one with rose oil, within that it is healed.
But if the hind bone of the spine is broken, and it is the end of the fracture, then let him enter the little finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient, and join the broken bone to the other with a bandage as closely as possible; and let him pause over the poultice and splint, if you want to do so, and let him fasten it securely.
And if you feel broken spines in him, then you tie it up, and let him be tied up, and let him be cured with the cure that precedes it until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the Restoration of the Wound.
The bones of the neck are sometimes broken, and if they are broken, then the fracture is only in their ends, and they are blunted in length and decline towards the joints; and pain occurs in the patient at the place, and the skin is stupified when the fracture happens.
And the restoration of him is that you extend your hand over it, so that it covers the fracture, which is its figure.
And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you tie it up according to your clothing, so that it matches its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in length, or it has already declined towards the joints, then you prepare your patient for the restoration of that fracture. And then, when you have tied it up, pause over the poultice, and let him fasten it with a bandage, and tighten it on that which does not cause pain of fracture or movement of the stelha.
And fill the cavity with what fills it in there, so that this takes its form according to equality, and order the slave to sleep on his back or open his side.
But if it happens that the wound is putrid, then stop the extention and rest of him until the putridness is stopped, and place over him what sits there according to what comes before; and return to the rest of him, and strengthen it with a cover.
And if bones are broken or fractured, then treat them.
Chapter XI.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Thighbone.
Thighbone is that which is between the hip and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of him is in two ways, and one of them is that you take a strong plait of grass according to this form:
And be tied in two ends with two knots, and then hang him from the raised place.
And follow the slave on a ladder; and then pour out his broken arm onto the plait where it reaches to the tip of him in the middle place where he is joined with the curvedness of the plait.
And hang him from some heavy cause, or the cook extends that to the sides of him; and then bring the doctor and that which heals the fracture together, so that the fracture returns according to what comes before; and then return to the rest of him.
And the other way is that the slave is raised up on his neck and hung by his hand; and then order two ministers that one of them hold water which is opened with its form; and the other holds the pus from him; and each of them extends to its side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then order to be held by two plaitings and by another, and each of the ministers extends to two sides.
And if the fracture is near to the end of the muscle, then stop that which is held by the half of the plait on the hip and by the other side, so that it reaches from him to the fracture where he is joined with the hip.
And if the fracture is near to the hip, then stop that which is held on that place and over the hip.
Take it with ease and effort, and then return it according to what comes before, and apply it by good application, then strengthen it if putridness does not happen.
But if putridness happens, then order the stricture to be opened on the seventh day, and place over it a woolen cloth dipped in wine vinegar and honey within which it rests, and then strengthen it.
And the way to strengthen that is to place plaster over the fracture, and then cover it with a drape of sailcloth; and then adjust the arm above the thighbone, and place your hand over its muscle.
And then return the drape and strengthen it above the thighbone, so that the arm is in its place of support, if you do not command from any cause of the broken bone.
Then use of supports.
And that which is held over the fracture is stronger than the others and more solid of them; and place between each plait the distance of the thumb, and the length of the plaits according to the break together with three fingers' width of the whole distance.
And then strengthen above the plaits with the same stricture which was spoken of at the beginning of this chapter.
And that your stricture on that place is more solid. And when the putridness has been opened, then order that which is less strict.
And if you move the position of the plaits and the stricture as we said at the hour when you restore the limb to its situation, then do so.
And if you fear putridness, then order that which is opened and the plaits to be left for seven days as we said before.
And then consider the plait in all parts for three days, so that nothing happens to it in that place of pruziment or swelling; or is forbidden food to reach the limb by disposition of superfluity of stricture; and then correct all this according to what we have said.
But if you are certain that nothing happens of it, then do not remove the plaster until three or more days have passed.
And let the slave sleep on his back, and his hands are on his chest.
And then place over the thighbone a full bowl of woolen cloth, and consider for all the night or day whether the figure of the broken limb is not changed or loosened; and if it is soft, then correct all this by your virtue.
And then the slave's food is according to the order which we have said before, that it is not strong at first, but becomes stronger as it is eaten; and then stop that it becomes larger by adding more.
And the custom of the slave and his chest is that they are strong in thirty days; and then stop that and are taken away, and water is given to him, and medicine is given to him with what corrects it.
And if the fracture is stiff, then do not remove that which holds the plait and the plaits within a month or within two months.
Chapter XII.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two sockets; the one is small, and that is what supports the hand; and the other is large, and that is what is held by the shoulder from the side which is more distant.
The large socket is broken only with great force, or with both ends together.
And when the small socket is broken above, then the restoration of him is slight, and his healing is also slightly.
And when the small socket is broken below, the fracture of him is bad, and his healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Then if the broken bone is the small socket above, then it is convenient to the doctor, and order its restoration that which is held by ease within which it is placed.
But if the large socket is broken, then stop that which is more violent.
And if both sockets are broken together, then order to be held by force with ease.
Then stop the figure of the hand with its own hand, and then extend it over a cushion, and place the palm of the hand on the sides, more than all the others say, and that which is auricular is lower than the others, and order the slave to sit on a cushion.
And be a cushion before him at the height or above him, so that the slave does not work.
Then order the minister to extend the arm from its shoulder or plait, and another minister extends above it with ease.
Then order the doctor to hold the bone within which it is shaped according to the best form that can be.
And if the fracture is putrid, then order it to be treated in its place by your virtue.
And if it appears in him separation that punctures the skin and is not according to your hope in the restoration of him, then stop him from him and proceed as we said before.
If the fracture is causing pain, I have already made a single cut, so then proceed to the cure for that.
And if it happens that a swelling occurs at the beginning of your recovery, then line a cloth with olive oil and white wax, and be careful to make it thin between refinement and subtility, and tightly wrap the cloth around it so that the swelling gives way; and then remove the cloth and apply a paste made from powder ground from clay and honey, and place plasters; and let that plaster which is placed over that fracture on one side and more securely on the other.
And know that the name of the plasters for the arms is in the majority of cases, or that the fracture is in one place or in two places together.
Then place your tightness in the place of the fracture more firmly and more violently, and when the tightness goes to the parts below the fracture or to the parts higher up, place the tightness a little less tightly according to whether it is preceded by the memory of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture be soft cloths wetted with humors, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightly wrapped be of a fine cloth between refined and thick, and so we have recalled.
And consider the member the part that is affected. And if there is any cause for which correction is necessary, so carefully considering the member that causes it, and then cover so that you inject water into it from a tail so that that prudence ceases.
Then release the member does not constrict it so that it rests, and then return to the tightness.
And if the tightness is already softened and the bone seems to have healed with the appearance of bones, then correct it altogether by your virtue.
And consider if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, for when it softens a little and leaves it for some days so that it runs to that nutrition, then tighten it again.
If there is no cause for those things which we have said to the patient, then do not cover it so that it is released within 10 days or a little more than those.
And then let the servant's hand be suspended by his virtue of moving agitation, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or it is firmly restored in 25 days, and all of it depends on the arrangements of the complexities and the arrangements of virtue.
Chapter XIII.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Hand of the Ma and of What Is Said.
And know that for the hand and fingers of the Ma and of what is said the fracture ends with the heart, and do not occur to them except in rare cases.
And when it happens to the ma or back fracture, then return the servant who is falling and facing him on an equal line, and then place his hand in front of him.
And the minister spread out the broken bones so that they are joined together with good joinery.
Then apply paste and manure, if it does not occur to you a swelling occurs; then place plasters according to the quantity of space, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
If the pinching is in the inner parts of the palm, then make a shape of cloth, and command the servant to tighten it with his palm pinched; and be tightly bound with long cloth.
And place the cauldron of wax on the cloth so that the wax is applied to the palm, and tighten it according to whether it is needed.
If the fracture is at the outer parts, then return the stela above and another stela from the outer part of the palm, so that the hand is raised and turned; and then tighten it, so as to turn the hand between the fingers with a stela.
And if it happens to the fracture in one of the fingers of the Ma and of What Is Said, then, if it is the small finger, tighten it according to whether it is needed and place a small stela on the hand so that the fracture is raised and not crushed.
If the fracture is in any of the other fingers of the Ma and of What Is Said, then, if it is in one of them, or in all of them together, then tighten it and bind it with a thread according to continuity; it is better; or place a small stela on it, as we have said in the small finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and return it, the arrangement of the swelling and opposition – to the right operation – to water that occurs when there is any cause, according to which the narration of it is repeated.
Chapter XIV.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Bone of the Thigh.
The thigh bones that are seen moving is broken and declared to the sense according to whether it turns in front and rises from behind.
The restoration of it is made in nine days or the limb is tightened on the fracture and another limb from the fracture, and the servant is prostrate on his belly and on his face.
And the minister spread out the whole limb according to its quantity, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is in the edge of the thigh, then make the limb spread out on its back at the edge of the fifth limb, so that the extension falls thereon, and the other limb leave the fracture.
And if the fracture is at the edge of the back, then make the limb spread out on its back, and place the extension on the outer parts.
And the minister joins the bone to its two sides within so that it reduces itself according to the natural appearance and the bone is joined together by good joining, then apply paste and tightness, if it does not occur to you a swelling occurs on the member. If it happens in the swelling, then you leave it for some days within so that the swelling occurs on it, and then return to your cure.
The tightness of it is done thus: wrap the fracture with a hard cloth, and double it two or three times, and remove any excess; and then wrap the chest within so that it reaches the neck and the edge of the thigh.
And put a long thread between the thigh and the chest from behind, and bring the ends of the thread from the outer parts of the two parts, and tie them together tightly within so that they do not slip; and then return them to their places on the cloth and the thigh.
And then place it on the thigh in the place of that broken sthela, and place one stela on the bone of the chest.
And then fill in the spaces between the chest and thigh with soft cloths, so that the tightness is secured.
And then begin with the tightness of the middle one on the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and how much more you remove from the part of the fracture, your tightness be lesser and less constricting and more wet.
And then extend the two ends of the thread to the outer parts within so that it reaches the neck, and tighten both ends of the thread from the other part so that the limb is not lifted from its place.
And then leave the tightness on it, provided that no swelling or swelling occurs in the member, nor does a swelling occur from above; and if it happens to any cause of those things, then take care of your fear for it, and correct what happens altogether, according to whether we have said that the cause is.
If the bone is broken, then it must be set in place as soon as possible; if not, then go to him and hold him steady, and cure that from which this memory was caused until he is healed.
And for some, this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by certain bones that are fixed to it with nails, as I have said above in the assistant and in the arms.
But nevertheless, in the restoration of him in such a way that it does not occur to the patient's limping; and if it is restored alone, another one that is applied to his other leg, then it is necessary for him to limp from that from which this memory was caused.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few more or a few fewer, and all of this is according to the diversity of conditions and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Ankle-joint of the Foot.
Know that this fracture of the ankle-joint of the foot is more likely to occur in those who ride horses.
But if it occurs to the fracture, then it is not so much a crack or a break in its parts; and this is what causes pain or an ache, and everything else is according to its feeling.
And the restoration of him is to be made as soon as he is broken at his joints with nails within such a time that he may be joined and made whole according to the possibility, by ease and convenience and construction.
Then apply plaster and place it over that round stone if you wish for that one; and strengthen it with astringent to the water in an appropriate way.
Then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, also with a poultice applied that is hot and similar to those from which one does not move or go until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Back.
Know that there are two bones in the spine, of which one is thick, and this is called the spinal bone; and the other is thin, and it is called the ribs.
And it occurs to either of the two kinds of fracture in the arm bones, and this is how restoration of him occurs as soon as the setting of the arm, and the operation of it is one and the same.
And if two bones are broken together, the spine is broken into pieces.
And if one of the thin bones is broken, then the spine is broken from behind.
And if the thick bone is broken, it breaks the rib from below; and this is of those causes that are not familiar to you.
Then administer astringent and ligation to the ribs according to the setting of it.
But nevertheless, if the fracture of the spine is not severe and there are no broken ribs, then the ligation should be mild and light; and it will give pleasure to your virtue.
But for the operation of the arms, when you set the bones and complete all of the work, then take two pieces of a branch of a tree that is left behind the causes from which they are taken; cut them short according to those which are small; do not cut them from the branches, but make them according to the length of the spine, and from the back into smaller pieces.
Then wrap each drape in two envelops according to its length, and place one over the joint of the spine from one part and another over the joint of the spine from the other part, and both should be placed from the back into a small space at the base of the neck.
Then tie the two bones in three places of the two extremities and at the middle one; for this arrangement of the spine prevents it from bending to the right or left, and is in a good position.
Then one piece of wood has been made according to the length of the spine; and it is placed in such a way that it retains its movement.
And above all, when you have broken this, then cure it when it has been broken, and when it is healed.
Then consider the spine every day and study it with great care, and you protect it from swelling or swelling or any similar cause; and if you notice any of these causes, then avoid him from doing this to the one that is broken until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the Fracture of the Skull and the Bones of the Neck and the Jaws.
The skull does not break in its entirety; but in the bones of the neck, it breaks in some cases; and in the jaws of the neck, it breaks in a few cases, and it occurs to them according to their disposition.
And if the bones of the neck are broken and those bones are raised up above each other, then the patient should be placed on his back on the ground prepared for this; and carrying him in this way.
Then place one of the legs over that which is raised by those bones, and press them together; and set them in such a way that they fit into their places.
Then apply plaster and stop up them, and place the legs of the patient on a small table, whose two ends are turned upward.
Then strengthen that one with the neck in its place, as you have wrapped it in drapes and with other causes from which you suffer.
After three or four days, then remove the plaster, because you will see that the bones are set in place, or if they are broken or if they have moved; and the operation on them is such.
If some of the jaws are broken, then restore them, and set them in place as soon as possible; and recommend to you in the restoration of the jaws of the hand. Then place the broken jaw on a stone according to its length, and make it slight; then put the feet of the patient on the table that you have recommended to you, and strengthen that one with astringent in an appropriate way.
If the broken bones of the jaw are two or three or more, then you place each one on a stone that is wrapped in drapes, and strengthen the table with it in its base; and make it stand on one end of the table, and place the feet of the patient on the other end of the table so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you consider all the causes which I have said to you in other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and avoid him from any accident to those ones.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the Fracture of the Hip-joint of the Woman and of the Thigh-bone of the Man and the Skull of the Man.
When the hip-joint of the woman is broken, then make it sit on the ground; and turn it towards the right leg slightly; and hold it in place.
Then the mother should bend her hip towards the floor; and turn it slightly towards the right leg, as soon as she is able to; and the woman should be made to lie on her back, and lift both legs slightly upwards, because all of this is forgotten until it is in front of the joint of the hip, with a hope and the broken thigh-bone returns.
Then place powder on both legs; and when he wishes to urinate, then turn his hip with ease, and urinate while sitting down; and reduce it again and return him to his first powder, making the same movements as before; and bring him back to his powder first.
And it should be done so for seven days or up to when he has recovered.
And if you want, take a bladder of olive oil and stretch it over the patient's nose with a cannula made of cane; and put all the bladder inside the patient's nose, and blow into the cannula until the bladder is inflated inside the patient's nose, because the fracture comes back.
Then let it be filled with cotton and kept for a few days according to how much has healed, then let it be healed.
And when the bones of the hip or foot are broken, then administer the restoration and injection of blood that we have mentioned above in the bone of the hip.
And that blood which is on the right does not hide in these close fractures and that it rarely happens, but mostly to him who has studied and practiced this my book; for that fracture means to you in the major ways of right-handedness in the restoration and strictness of it, and therefore understand well.
And if the staff of the man is broken, take a splint, and put the staff in that; and place it over his wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and let it be left for three days or up to when he has recovered, then let it be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the Restoration of Fractures of Bones When There is Swelling.
Convenient is to him to whom the fracture happens, and mainly if the bone is large as that of the thigh or of the neighbor, or similar to that, that you protect it and let blood there as often as the circumstances of bloodletting allow it, and as we have said above with respect to the same.
And if the swelling subsides, then know that you protect it from the re-occurrence of blood before you powder on it dried blood, unless there is another cause presented.
And then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, unless there is a swelling.
But if the swelling comes on slowly, then let the restoration of it be left until the ninth day, until the swelling subsides, and do not approach it in the third day after the ninth, for you would make a bad accident happen.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the joint covered, then know that you should reduce it and close it with your own hands easily and little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the equation of it with your own hands, then reduce it with your own hands as well; and this instrument which is made of iron, its length is seven fingers or eight, and its width is according to the amount of blood; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four according to the quantity that you require for the treatment in all kinds of fractures.
And let it be rolled up and be in it a little bit of grass that it does not bend the compression on it at the time of the operation.
And let it be of acute tip at which is margin in its tips; and let the string that holds it be of great thickness, and of most of it within the splits.
This is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek "labra volent zaratem", which means little palm.
So that the end of it be raised above the prominent end of the bone.
And let it be placed in a vice until the bone returns to its place, and is closed with some equation.
And therefore strive to close the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is small, and do not take that instrument for a good operation, then know that you pierce the end of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with the water that we have mentioned above, then cut it with the knife of the incisers which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in some way is possible for you.
And then remove what remains in the bone of small sharpness and little scars.
And when the bone has been reduced, and the reduction of the patient causes a violent painful throbbing, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you have done to the patient gives him great relief.
When your reduction of the bone is completed, and then dip cloth in black antiseptic, especially if it is in summer, and do not approach the swelling with your hand or any other cause in which salt is applied, so that it does not cause in it a bad corrosion and decay.
And then administer the bloodletting in the hour of the third compliment of the bone's restoration, and leave the swelling uncovered in order that you cut with scissors and use bandages according to the amount of the swelling.
And keep all your care that you do not strain the swelling with the fracture, for it will cause bad things to happen, and make bad accidents happen to the patient's own malady or its corrosion or decay, so it is cured. And if the patient' s constriction loosens, softens, different from the constriction of other fractures.
And if the swelling is great or is bad swelling, and you are afraid that you will experience those bad accidents that we have mentioned above, then do not let it be covered with a cloth, but rather wrap it in a hard cloth instead of a soft one at the place of the bandage, and use a pointed cautery to make points on the surface of the foot.
And when the swelling has begun to appear after one or two days, that it is very hot, then you remove the cloth with which you had covered it from above with a cloth, and then administer cold water, wetting the same with which our custom is that we treat swellings, thus cooling them down with four-part water and similar to that.
And know that you should cut off the limb and consider the swelling in every day from morning until evening until it is hardened and firm, and know that the member has been prepared so that the bad corrosion runs from it to the splits of the leaves with ease.
If the swelling has passed more than a few days and it is neither hardened nor separated from it the limb, then know that there are only two possibilities, either to leave it alone or to take care of it. And of those things that are separated and extracted remain and are taken away, those that are not separated and the member is made to cause pain, then know that you should cut those according as what water can be done.
And if the swelling is swollen or rotten, so it is signs of corruption or decay, then know that you should leave one of those with water which you have mentioned above as a treatment for which a narration precedes in its chapter.
And of that in which know that you should be calm and present your case: When the bone is broken, emerge on the member as well as the bones of the hips and shoulders and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction from it or extrication from it, for it will cause a bad accident to happen by water; and leave it within which you can return, for it is firm support over itself for about twenty days or up to when he has recovered. And then take care of the swelling if it is visible, and if not leave that.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of a swelling that occurs in the trace of a fracture.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
"Then consider if the accident is recent and administer those medicines that have been recommended for it, and stir, and look at, and search, and compare with those; then take some of those or all, and apply those to the wound in a poultice, and constrain those over it for good constriction."
"Then leave the constriction in place for a few days; then remove it and repeat it, unless the accident is improved; or press down on that plate of lead, because lead has the property of removing whatever is inflated in the limbs."
"But if the accident has already become fixed and severe, and necessity forces you to cut it, then cut it from the most superior part of the limb, and slice off the excess and prominent part, or tear it with razor blade until it is healed."
Chapter 21.
"Of restoring a Fracture. When the fracture is restored and it is necessary to bring back the limb to its usual shape, then do not force it."
"When the bone fracture is healed and it is necessary to bring back the limb to its usual shape, then do not force it except for a few causes: one of which is that the ligament becomes weak because of many solutions, or by excess of constriction of the ligaments so that nutrition is prevented from reaching the member; or because of a lot of useless encumbrance; or because of excessive movement at an inappropriate time; or because of a lack of blood in the body and to treat it.
"And for the cure of it, give food to the patient and make his heart firm until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath; and introduce needles and leech-bites into it."
"Then return the limb to its usual position, so that the peg draws nutrition to it, or continuous encumbrance of water is applied to it, until the nutrition returns and reaches its normal shape."
Chapter 22.
"Of the Treatment of Twisted Bones When Restored and Preventing the Operation of Them from That Place That Caused It."
"When the limb is already restored to health because of twisting and prominence on the twisted bone and the nodulation of it, and yet the form of the limb is disturbed, but nevertheless the limb is not prevented from its natural operation, then do not take the word of one who says that the limb that exists is a new twist."
"But already there are some medicine and restaurators that have done this to our land; and this operation is very abominable, losing the sign of fear of which one dies."
"But if the claudication and accident are recent, then consider that they should be treated with water-based broths that are cooked herbs, leaves of aloes, and raisin juice, mixed with a little olive oil; or with mucilage made from aloe leaves, and applied to it; or with grass oils, and wrapped in furs; and similar to those of the medicines that are called emollients."
"And some times it is dissolved with a slight friction that is very moist, and it is administered movement of the limb from the beginning at all times."
"But if twisting has already been added beforehand and it is severe, and the accident has become a cause of need for it to be treated with fire, then consider that the pus above it is dried up, and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and cut off whatever excess there is of the accident of that member with a fine scalpel, and administered easily to that which is sollicited and studied."
Chapter 23.
"Of Speaking in Dislocation."
"Dislocation is a separation of any of the joints of the limb, by which it is prevented from moving, and the figure of the member is disturbed, and great pain and injury come upon the patient."
"Then consider if you have dislocation, then try to reduce it quickly, because if it is delayed, the joint is swollen and greatly interfered with."
"And therefore do not try to massage or stretch it at the time of the reduction, because it has been shown that this causes spasms and pain."
"But if it happens to you, then consider that you retreat from the surgery of the limb, and it is allowed to rest until the swelling passes; and the member is bathed with water and oil, and reduced easily."
"And all members are treated with that water from which memory will come in its place."
"And the eyes have already been ordered and the chapters of dislocation are arranged according to whether they precede fracture; from the superior part of the limb to the inferior."
Chapter 24.
"Of the Treatment of Mandibular Dislocation."
"The two mandibulars are dislocated if they do not bite; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are separated a little by movement, or completely dislocated and completely separated, so that they are softened at the joint before the saliva comes out of the mouth, so that it cannot be closed and the tongue of it is wrapped up in the word."
"But if the dislocation is little, then in the major preparations return because there is a little cause for concern."
"But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then consider that it be reduced with a slight friction, and not delayed at all."
"And if the minister has the head of the patient, and he enters the mouth with a needle, then consider that it dislocates the mandible inwardly from one side; or that he enters with two needles together, if the dislocation is of both sides, and all others of him are outside those which he enters; and order the patient to cease his jaws and absolve them in any way; and the needle wraps the mandible and brings it back to its place."
"But if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are completely dislocated, then administer evaporating with water and oil, so that the reduction of both is slight, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, except for this: that the mouth is closed."
"And so return and be engualled, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then put them on a cloth of silk, and make it with wax and oil rosin; and then reduce easily with pliable limbs."
"And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head between two pillows, so that he does not bite on either side; and do not force him to swallow any cause; having forbidden food for lions, because when the pain is improved and the mandibles are clenched, then bite it."
"And let it be administered easily, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and calling out, except that the mandible is clenched and healed."
And if it is difficult to reduce two mandibles when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their original places, then there will be frequent fevers and frequent vomiting of soda, and the abdomen of the patient will be very swollen, and he will vomit pure cholera.
And when you see this, know that it is a waste of time; and the one who experiences this will die within ten days.
Chapter 25
On the Reduction of a Dislocated Hip and an Extremity of a Muscle
The furcula is not dislocated from the inside by its continuation to the foot; and some are dislocated from the outside at the beginning, and this is pronounced.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his legs. Then cut the place with your strong palm, for it will return.
Then put a plaster and grind and strengthen it.
Maybe the extremity of that which cuts off and continues to that, is not dislocated in any day; then cover it so that it is reduced and enclosed according to what I have said, and according to your apparatus.
Then put a plaster on it, and grind, and tighten, and order the patient to rest until it is healed.
And in this cure the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26
On the Reduction of a Dislocated Muscle
Know that the muscle is not dislocated unless according to three ways, and one of them is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the rib at the beginning of the thigh.
And the second is that it is dislocated from its middle part of the muscle, and this is a great pain; and it is not dislocated from behind by the shoulder, and it is not dislocated from in front by the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and comes out from behind the rib at the beginning of the thigh, and mostly in those parts where there are few muscles, it is dislocated with difficulty; but in those where there are many muscles, it comes out with effort.
And a great many men experience percussion or impact, and the muscle of them is swollen with swelling caused by the hand that has already been dislocated; and it is felt by the one who has been dislocated.
Then cover it so that you are not above it, and then proceed to the cure of it.
And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is at the beginning of the rib; but so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because there is a great difference between them; and touch the concav part of the muscle and the rib as much as a bird's wing, and the patient cannot reduce his shoulder to its place, nor can he move it at all.
If it is dislocated from below the rib or above it, and you feel a clear touch, and there is no doubt about it.
And of this dislocation, a slight reduction is made when it is fresh, and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises his arm up to its shoulder; then stop the ties on either side of the rib of him, and raise the joint with force into its place, and the minister raises his arm, and extends it before him; then stop those on both sides because they return with difficulty.
Maybe if by what I have said it does not return, and only from the beginning where the dislocation occurs, then after three days, know that the patient is bathed in cold water and given a fomentation that softens and relaxes him as much as if his joints were pulled out, and fenugrec, and melilot in water, and be administered.
Then the patient is to be placed on his back and paused on both sides of him waiting for the hair to dry, which has been softened by the fomentation, and then the doctor pauses his foot on the spine, and raises his head with power, and throws the patient's hand so that it is not lifted up towards the ribs, and another minister holds his head, so that he does not lift it towards the ribs, because this returns to its place.
And if you want, reduce this second way: and it is that you should have a man present who is longer than the patient, and be on his side, and insert his arm under the rib of the patient and raise his rib to its shoulder while suspending the patient in the air, and another minister holds the patient' hand from behind the ribs. Maybe if the patient is very painful, know that he should not be suspended because it returns soon.
And it is reduced in this way: and it is that he should be fixed on the ground with a long staff, which is round in shape, like a pilum of mortar, which is not too thick or too thin, and then it is paused on both sides of the patient; because it is placed on the top of the staff, and the patient stands according to its length, and then its limbs are extended with power, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if the reduction of it is difficult because of all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a staff whose length is equal to two arms, and its width is four fingers, and whose thickness is adjusted so that it does not reach the rib from behind; and its form should be as follows:
Then tie one end of the staff to the top of him, and let the other end rest on the ground, so that the staff does not slip from under the patient.
Then tie one end of the staff to both sides of the rib of the patient, and let it extend up to the shoulder, and then secure the staff to the aide and the arm, and the extremity of the hand.
Then let the arm rest on a step of a ladder according to its width, and let the hand be extended towards the ground, and let the other limb be suspended from behind, because the joint will return to its place with speed.
And with this instrument it is complete according to each way that you can imagine, and then, wait for the hair to dry; then put a plaster prepared of flour of moly and egg white on all the muscle, so that it hardens above it, and then tighten it from behind the rib with a strap, and let it hang, and do not lift the hand up towards the ribs; and the limb be turned over the plaster, and the arm be tied to its neck, and let it be wrapped, and do not tie the hand up towards the ribs for seven days.
Then wait a few days for the patient to be comforted, because it is easier to recover from treatment.
Then give a few more days, and then exercise his movements, and if it does not become softer, then it is healed.
Maybe if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that occurs with it or because of another cause, then know that in such a case, three torches are administered according to what was said in the chapter on cauterization.
And if this does not happen, and seven days pass without the limb being fixed in its place, then know that the nerve ends of the muscle, which are at the head of it, have been cut or stretched out or softened; and you will know that the joint has never returned to its place, and you will know that the limb is never fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is made to the foot and the nipple or behind the joints, the reduction is done at a push and extended to the most, until it returns.
And be administered in that other constriction, and cure that within that it is healed.
And if it happens that the healing is heavy on the member and the delay in its movement, then the patient uses hot water baths covered until that gravity is relieved and returns to the nature of it first.
Chapter .xxvii.
On the treatment for dislocation of the hip joint:
Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated mainly at the front part of the hip joint, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you as it causes pain when walking or standing, so that when you adjust the hip joint with the saw or touch it according to some shape, it is dislocated, and when you set it straight with the knee, it is clearly declared, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the muscle of him.
And when you set the joints free, reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to you with a cold cauterization, for if you come to it with a cold cauterization, the reduction is difficult and the cure is not completely done; and most so when it is at the back parts, because the pain of all other kinds of dislocations is worse, and the hot water baths are given as soon as possible.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, it is that the hand of it is extended with two hands, and the arms of it are spread out, and the feet of it are placed on the hip joint and let it, and push the joint with the knuckles of his fingers or with the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
More so if the dislocation is at the front parts, then return as soon as it touches with the knuckles of his hand or with the palm of his hand;
And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer very hot water with great force.
And that are two ministers who extend their arms, and have that bath of two ministers so that it is not re-dislocated before the extension.
And return the arms to each other quickly, because it is wrapped in a long folded cloth over his hand, or just.
And when the member touches the joint with its hand, rub it with any oil so that those causes which help in lubricity of the joint are given with ease; and then push the joint with a strong push until it returns to its place.
And the reduction of it is that it is placed on the paste in which there is rigor and constriction with blood of a hen, and is extended with constriction down, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and is left for some days.
And then remove it; and if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the cloth of it and leave that.
And if you see that the joint is not strong, then remove the paste and cloth, and leave that for some days until it is extended; and then remove it.
More so if it happens that the reduction of the joint is with gravity, and its disposition is moving, then administer humidity in a bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause on the joint and let it rest, so is not moved by heavy movement; and leave that for a day and night. And then remove that, and put it in a bath; and when it is relaxed, then you rub the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat over that with a light movement, and the third time, The corruption has already come about on the denouement of the bath, although it is limited.
And if you want, pause on that cow's fur, wet and sharp, with a strong hand over it; and make it a few times, because that is wet and reduces its disposition.
Chapter.xxviii.
On the treatment for dislocation of the collarbone: If it is a dislocation of that which is between the arms and the hand,
If the hand of a person has been dislocated, and the reduction of that is slight, and the opposite is true for other joints; however, it is necessary to be careful when reducing it in the first hour that it has been dislocated, before the aphumation or cauterization.
And the reduction of that is that you pause the hip joint on a table with a minister's hand, and extends his hand, and the other minister pauses his hand or his palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
However, if the palm is already placed on the navel of the hand, then the patient pauses his two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to that of the two hands, then the position of the hand is turned inside out on the table, so that the hand of the member rests on the edge of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, then it is good; and otherwise, then administer hot water with aphumation, and leave that; and do not repeat it, because otherwise, it does not suffer or does not need the reduction of it for more than three days.
However, the hip joint is second to its tortuosity; and there is no cause for the patient, except that the hand becomes soft and does not need to be strong for any cause; and you know that the nerves are delicate or twisted, and if it is not strengthened with cauterization near its cavity, then give it a strong cause.
Then when it returns slowly, then pause on that paste which we have mentioned, and leave it and strengthen it for three days; and then remove it and exercise the hand.
And if the movement of it is slow and happens that there is any gravity, then remove it with a cold water bath and gentle friction for some time until it is relieved.
Chapter.xxix.
On the treatment for dislocation of the hips: If you have a dislocation of one hip, treat it as described above; and if you have a dislocation of both hips at the same time, then reduce them with water baths and friction as much as possible until they are relieved.
Some joints are dislocated completely from the hip joint.
And when any of these joints is dislocated from the two palms or navel of a person, then reduce it with strong hands until it returns to its place; and if you want, then administer aphumation in a bath for more relief.
And then support the tip of that finger, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and leave that for two days.
And then hang that up and extend it until it is completely extended in its place on the day after tomorrow.
And when the night comes, then remove that with the same method as described above, and do not cease to loosen that on the day and exercise its movement, and remove it at night; and make that straight for some days until it is completely healed.
Do the same to that, if it is dislocated at the navel of the hand, and remove that from its place and make the first operation with a strong hand until it is healed.
Do the same to that when it is dislocated in other places as well.
Chapter.xxx.
On the treatment for dislocation of the spine of a person: If you have a dislocation of one spine, treat it as described above; and if you have a dislocation of both spines at the same time, then reduce them with water baths and friction as much as possible until they are relieved.
When any of the spine bones in the neck or back become completely dislocated and remain out of place, then there is no cure for the patient, since death looms over him.
And from this it is that the excretion of the patient goes outside his will, and he cannot hold it; and some of his limbs or two legs or two arms or one of them; or one spine bone out of place, because the moved ones are four in number.
Therefore that one is already out at the back and is called gangrene.
The cure for him is that you consider if the gangrene comes from putrefaction, because there is no cure or healing of it at all.
But in that which is caused by a blow or a sound or similar to those, the Ancients have said many ways of cure with long words, of which the least returns with profit; I have already seen and opened up from that which is too little for him because of my proximity to his ear, at which I have made it calm and formed out of a different instrument than that on which I will show you and open it up.
And of those, there is no healing but only the one which happens to him from whom I have told you.
And it is that the patient be placed on his face above his chest near the wall, and that a wet instrument be placed under him to prevent the feet from touching the ground.
Then a straight stick is placed, stuck in the ground at the foot of his head, and another behind his feet on the other side of the foot.
The minister should hold the stick, and not place it in a hole; and another minister should hold the other one in that form.
Then wrap the head of the patient and let the little chains touch his hair firmly; and extend the end of the chain to the stick which supports his head, and let that one hang on it; then tighten the other chain on his hips, and let the legs be held in this way; then adjust all the chains and let those ones hang on the other stick which supports his feet.
Then the minister who holds the stick should throw it out to the end of the stick which supports his head, and the two sticks and chains of his limbs should not be removed or taken off from their places as I have said; but the minister must not hold them firmly in that way.
And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with great force until he feels it vibrate, or that he places them on a table and tightens it on the feet until he returns.
But if it does not return with this form, then take a table whose height or length is at a distance of three arms from the wall, and dig in the wall where I have said that there is a place for the end of the table. Then place the middle part of the table on the spine, and let the doctor place his feet on the other end, and tighten it well so that the spine vibrates and returns to its place.
And if you want, open the door which is turned to the wall; and it is that you be on the ground with your head at the back of the foot two sticks, the length of which should be a palm, and let your head be in the back of the foot only two sticks; and it should be between each stick the length of a palm, and so should it be turned out through each stick that runs from it and returns to its place, and each one should be held fast on the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a round stick in which is the door, and it should be turned to the two sticks of the foot; and it should be open from both ends of the two sticks.
And at the end of him is a stick in which the stick is turned, whose length is a palm and with which it is opened; and in the other two sticks is similar to that one.
Then tighten the chains that you have put on the feet of the patient in the stick which is meant for his head, and the chains that you have stretched in the surface of the foot; and tighten those same chains which you have stretched under the hips of the patient, and which are meant for his legs.
And it is that each side of the door be closed and that a minister twists the door by his hand, and the doctor places the spine as I have said.
Then when the spine returns to its place, and the location is covered up, then put a dry and smelly substance on it, and then cover; then place it over the table surface of which the height is three fingers or more, and whose length is an amount that reaches the location of gangrene, and above the spine.
Then let him be held by the chains that we have spoken about, and feed him with subtle nutrition until he is healed.
And if there is any imminence in the place at the end of the healing, then let him be given medicine that softens and cleanses him by means of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already has been administered there a plate of lead.
In some cases, imminence in the back of the spine can be caused by dislocation; and it is that bone which you have already said because it will not cover that it should be done with this medicine, since it will make him very strong, so that death may come to him easily.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure for a dislocated hip.
You should know that the connection of the thigh and the connection of the muscle does not have any other dislocation except for that which happens in those parts with little movement and convexity.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated from inside, or from outside, or from the front, or from behind.
It is most often dislocated from inside, and less so from the front or from behind.
And the dislocation of him to the inside is four times, when you adjust the hip of the patient with good medicine and he is healthier than before; and the patient cannot bend his leg because of the language which stops it from stopping, so that the head of the hernia comes here.
And the sign of that which happens to him is from the outside, it is because the accidents of him are opposite to that accident.
And the sign of that which happens to him at the front is because it spreads its hip according to the order, but the patient does not bend his leg and hurts more; and if it pierces from going forward and he cannot walk on it; and the urine of him is repressed and his hernia is inflamed, and his walking should be by the grass.
And the sign of that which happens to him from behind is because it does not expand the side, and it does not bend the leg in front, so that it bends more than the other; and the hip is shorter than the other one, and the hernia is soft, and the head of the hernia is here.
The reduction of the spices of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which already has been overcome to it having that aprop you administer reduccion and Roman according to his disposition; then it is not in that cure for all; and therefore it does not cover that in that prosumpcion is made.
May's in that one where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four spices of dislocation, then you cauterize it to turn back the joint and extend it to the inside and outside, and move it to the right and left, because strong returns it and does not need another cure.
May's, if it does not return in this way, then you prepare minister strong and extend the bed of him from the part behind, or to his mas, or to lianment what is tied on the bed his denol; and other minister extends the hand of him above enayssi that it moves his mas behind the titillics of him; and aprop strengthen lianment lion on the root of the coccyx, and has another minister ters the extremitat of lianment.
And is extension of him or of the part behind to the angle to the part of the hipbone, or from the part behind to the part of the jaw.
And is the extension of all these in a veil within that the patient is elevated to his couch and that it remains hanging.
This kind of extension is specific for all four cases.
And if the dislocation returns to water that we have said, is good; and otherwise, then it is necessary for all specific water that they say of the own cure.
In the reduction of him own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inside parts, you consider that the patient is raised on his back; and aprop place the lianments on the root of the coccyx in that place between the head of the coccyx and the place that is behind the angle to the upper part of the hipbone. And approve extend lianment in his above the part of the angle to the lower part of the hipbone.
And another minister strong takes the hand of him, and rips off the gross part of the coccyx patient and extends to the outside parts by violent extension because it returns to its own place.
And this specific cure is the least severe one with which that member is reduced compared to the other spices.
May' if it is excused on you and does not obey to the entrance to this specific cure of all, then you consider that they are tied the two feet of the patient together with lianments strong and little, on the two talus bones and on the two denols.
And is the length of each one of its by the quantity of four said, and is the bed coccyx extended more than the other for a quantity of two said.
And you consider that the patient is suspended on its head and it is in the most; and is the length of him from the ground a quantity of two bras.
And you command to a young strong that he cuts off the head of the coccyx, and is suspended to him other young, and another young cuts down the coccyx with strength that it is tied up, because the joint returns to its own place quickly.
May' in the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated to the outside part, you consider that the patient holds on his hand according to what we have said in the habit; and is strengthened lianment on the bed coccyx especially and on the feet of him.
And two sticks are placed, the one on the feet of him, and the other on his head; and two sticks are placed to adjust in the middle of the stick that it is fixed with which the patient is wrapped wrapped up so that the coccyx does not suffer from that the stick be between the thighs of him, so that the extension to the inside parts is not pulled.
And each minister extends to his part, and the doctor with his hand swallows the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then you consider that the bed is extended little by little, and it is according to this story on the stick; and the doctor pauses the palm of his right hand on the angle coccyx, and approves cuts that one with the other, and with that cut stops that extension to the front parts to the part of the jaw.
And if the dislocation is to the back parts, then you consider that the coccyx is extended to the front parts, and it is elevated from the ground; taking into account that it stops over a hard thing, so that as the bed is dislocated to the outside parts, it is according to what we have said about the wrapping up of him on two sticks; and it is on its face and the lianments are extended, as we said, without turning.
And you consider that is administered compression on a table about the place where the joint is.
Then by the reduction is completed as you consider - and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend two beds to the patient, and when you see those wrapped up and the patient pulls out his own bed and extends it in this way that the stick does not suffer in any part; and you apply a bandage on it so that the stick does not suffer by three days or four.
And you remove the lianments and the bandage, and compare one bed to another.
Then, if you see those wrapped up in your eyes only, then you know that the dislocation has been closed, and leave him lying down.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and bandage that one, and pulls out the other according to your first extension, and leaves that in three days.
And you remove that one, then that one should walk slowly for some days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol III.
On the Cure of Dislocation from the Jaw
The jaw is dislocated according to three ways because it is dislocated to the outside parts, and to the inside parts, and to the front parts; and to the back parts it is not dislocated.
The sign of dislocation of him is that you order the patient to apply his bed to the coccyx; then you know that the jaw is dislocated.
And the restoration of all his ways is that you pass on the patient's right hand, in order that he has already extended his bed; then consider that it should be attached to his cheek with strength, and pause the foot of him between the two ties; and approve that one attaches the jaw of him to your palms, and those others are placed between the two ties over the patient's jaw with strength, and another minister extends its foot until he returns to its own place.
The sign of recovery of him is that his bed should attach itself to the coccyx with a non-laborious lever.
And you bandage that one and attach its bed to the coccyx, and approve those wrapped up with a bandage for three days or four; and then you remove them.
And do not use the bed for a few days, until it is healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of him to you is excused, then administer very strongly the ingredients that are used in the treatment of the hand before the narration.
Chapter .iii.
Of the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
The shoulder sometimes is relieved by small movement, and sometimes the dislocation takes place all at once; it is caused either from within or from without.
And the sign of the dislocation of him is that sometimes the shoulder swells as a result of the dislocation.
But the treatment of moving him is easy recovery; and it is that he is extended with ease to his side and is put back in its place so that he does not come out again.
But in the treatment of him when he is dislocated all at once, cover that you do not make a cut on the right side, and have another minister who is strong and brave behind the two of them at the patient's feet.
Then turn you to the right hand, the toe of the dominant foot, and to your left hand, the toe of the foot under the patient' head, in its place.
Then turn you to the right foot, and to your left foot twice, then extend it to your left, and take up the feet of the patient with your right hand under their legs; then put them on their back.
Then make two turns according to which you count.
Then take up the feet at the third turn, and you are on the side of the cavity.
So if he returns in one turn or in two according to this method, and if the foot comes back, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation, for that returns again.
But if it is forbidden to reduce him on the ground according to which we have spoken before, then place the bed on two legs on the ground; extend a mat on the ground, and place it between the thighs of the patient, and you have wrapped it up in the bed; so that he does not come out.
Then the minister of him hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with its hands or with a pointed thing on its back; then another minister extends the foot to the leg or to the thigh, and the mat is placed between them; so that the hand does not come out, but that it may be held in position.
Then the doctor absorbs the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the cushion on the side where it is needed; for the dislocation comes easily.
And when the dislocation comes back and it is announced to you that the reduction of him is accomplished, then apply very strongly, and bind the foot with a strong ligature to the leg.
Then that you do not hurt or injure the nerves which are behind the shoulder, in order that the ligature may not be too tight and cut the blood supply to it.
Then leave it for two or three days; then if the ligature is soft, take it off.
Then remove it after three days, and do not walk in the cold air for four days. But if it is necessary to move in front of that space, it is not certain that the dislocation does not come out and get worse, so that it cannot be treated; but take care.
And if he swells up, then administer very strongly to him the ingredients that we have mentioned before in another place of treatment and healing; so that he is relieved.
Chapter.iii.
Of treatment of a dislocation of the toes.
If the dislocated foot is held in its place with few movements, it is easy to move; but if not, then take care.
But if the dislocation is in one of the two toes of the foot, then cover that you do not make a cut on the side of the patient' foot, and place it on a mat or table; so that he goes away as he walks.
Then turn the patient to the side, and place the heel of the foot on the mat; so that he goes away as he walks; then take care that it does not come out of its place, and do not allow it to be moved; then see if it is held in position, and do not let it come out.
Then place the sole of the foot on a table that can support it all, which has two legs, and extend it with strength and firmly for three days; then take care to remove it, and allow it to rest by walking in the cold air for four days; so that it does not come out, and is healed.
Chapter.v.
Of the diseases of dislocation that are caused by plague or fracture or both.
When you find any of those causes, and if you are engaged in the treatment of that disease and the restoration of it, sometimes you find success, and sometimes not.
But for the cure of him do not overestimate; but let another man who is wise in the art come slowly and mild; and do not use any medicine that causes swelling unless it is necessary, and leave the bed to the will of God; but if you hope to save a person from death, then use the medicine which softens it, and leave it to be judged by God. Then try to reduce him at the beginning of the disease, before it becomes fatal; but if it is not possible to do so, then leave it until the cause comes out.
Then if the member returns as we have said before, then administer to it medicine which causes swelling and cure it with plague medicine; so that it may be cured of the plague.
But if the dislocation is due to a fracture and you find that they are separated, then you should make them as close together as possible; and in that foot, only apply simple medicines of the sort which have been mentioned in the treatment of simple diseases.
But protect and avoid according to your ability the instrument in the ways of danger as much as you can; for that is better to you than I, and remain in your glory, and praise your Lord, and hasten to your salvation at all times. Thus ends the words of Al-Bucaasim which he has elaborately explained about the disease. May God be pleased with him! Te agradezco la traducion, y estoy a su disposicion para cualquier otra tarea que desee realizar. Adiós.
