O sons, I present to you this book, which is the last one in the science of medicine, by its completion, its consequences, its explanations and its explanations, it seems to me that I satisfy you with this treatise, which begins with the operation of hand, that is, surgery.
For the operation of hand is laid down in our region and at our time totally deprived, except that it greatly threatens the science of it, and its signs are left; and they would not be other than a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed most and have led to error and confusion within that they are closed the explanations of it and is stretched the force of it and the art.
And it seems to me that I have revived that by the order of this treatise in that second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes to the forms of instruments of cautery and other instruments of work, whether by addition of the declaration, and preparation thereof, which is necessary cause.
And the reason that a good craftsman does not excel in his art in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that he covers his actor before it has been practiced in the science of anatomy which discovers the joints within it; and the connection and separation of them; and the sense of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their names, and the expansion of them; and the pulses of veins and quiet veins, and the places of their feeling.
And therefore I say that Hipocrates, who is called by a name, excels in the work that is small, and more so in the art of surgery.
And we have already said of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever does not know that we have spoken of anatomy, it is clear that he falls into error and because many are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that one, which is the science of experiments and experiences.
For I saw a doctor with an open book and tried to prove that he had made an incision of a scrofulous apostema in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck so that blood flowed much from her, so that the woman died among her friends.
And I saw another doctor that he drank a stone from a man who had passed it in his state; the stone was large, and brought it to him, and dried up that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have called me to draw out that stone, and I saw that by the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient, surely he will die.
And I saw another doctor who took a fee of a duke from our land for surgery; and he put his patient on a black couch, and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, drew out the fracture on the skin, using powdices and needles to make strong tension, and did not leave the skin breathing.
Then he took off the bandage according to his desires, and he prayed, and he removed the dressing by a few days, and commanded that we take off the ligament; and so, as it is, within that the wound and the foot were broken, and it came to harm.
And I was called me to remove the bandage, and I prepared myself to take off the dressing, and so did I get peace and ease of their pains.
But the corruption was confirmed in the member, so I could not restrain that one, and did not walk because the corruption of the member was dangerous to the patient.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous pustule, and it turned to an ulcer near some days, within that the maliciousness of it increased with its lord.
For the cause is because the cold cautery is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not cover that it comes to him with iron of anything, but that it is a member which suffers everything from it.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary to you that the operation of hand be divided into two operations: one in which the surgery is associated with life, and an action through which there is danger in its greatest dispositions.
And I have already found this book in all places where the operation of hand is done, and not in any place where it is wrong or frightening; therefore it is necessary to you that you keep it shut and look at it, so that its pages do not prevent me from speaking and disturbing you.
And therefore take your weapons in solicitude and protection of God, and your malignities in kindness and fastness.
And use the best way by the grace of God in order to achieve salvation and admirable succession, and leave behind your terrible malignities of difficult recovery, and retain your weapons from here that you do not fear them, so that it remains to your glory, and first of all in the world and after your sanctities.
I already say in some of your monitions: "Do not treat a bad disease, so that you do not have to deal with bad doctors."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book and the first of the first part. The first chapter ordered from the head, in the forms of instruments and tools of cautery, and from that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, of sawing and piercing, and of vacuums, and of sucking up water, and of similar things to those, completely written and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter continues the division of the head: and the first of the fourth part; and you begin with the causes of illnesses by the same persons, and that it is not necessary to speak of the cause of illness; "the cure is escape". And therefore I say that I could not speak of the cause of the head in its part, but only of the cure for it.
For I say that the quality of the movements of that cautery and the noise of it, and in what combination they should not be used; and here begins the discussion of all the book.
Then I say that the speech of the quality of cauterization and its harm is long and prolix, subtil for science, and secretly hidden; and from it many wise men have spoken, and they have disagreed with each other, and to me it is enough a little of their sermons, fearing lengthening.
And I say that cauterization confers on the entire universal body, which is matter or substance, except for two complexes, which are complex of matter.
In the complex of tail and dry matter will be separated; for some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the contrary of that, that cauterization is not convenient in a disease that is by nature and by dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not convenient that this complex of tail and dry matter that is wet and dry should be healed.
And he who says the contrary of that, that by cauterization is made health in all disease that is tail and dry that comes to the bodies of men, for when you compare the bodies of men with the wetness of fire, you find the body of man frizzed.
And I say by the speech of that one, that experience has already discovered to me a few times.
But however it does not cover that which has already been discovered and exercised in the chapter of cauterization through latter exercise, and knows the diversity of the bodies of men and the disposition of their diseases in different ways, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the space of time of those.
But in the other complexes, it is not over you fear, and more in the disease that are hot and wet, for all doctors have agreed on those, and they have not disagreed in the healing by cauterization in them.
And know, children, that of the secret of cure by fire cauterization and of its goodness, it is about cauterization with medicine burning, for the fire is simple, the application of which does not reach but to the member that is cauterized and does not harm the other member by the applied medicine, only a little damage.
But the application of burning medicine reaches to that in the members who does not burn, and strongly brings about healing in the difficult-to-heal member and strongly hears it.
But fire, by its subtlety and its substance's goodness, does not make the water flow but rather makes it overflow; And I have already known by experience and by the length of service in studying about the truth of causes; and by this water I am absolved from the length of speech because it is not understood in this pause to you hidden about fire, and the quality of the operation in the bodies and the expulsion of them through which are expelled diseases, with a philosophical speech, which would be clear in your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to make cauterization and pause the best time of spring.
I say that cauterization is convenient at any time, so that the harm of the time's accident is submerged in the healing of water that cauterization draws it out, and more so if cauterization is for painful or necessary pains, strongly and quickly, those who do not suffer delay because those that come about harm are greater than a little damage coming by the time.
And thus do not make it in your times, or children, water is not considered but the common people and foolish doctors, so that to that disease that is healed by cauterization is not convenient at all time, and pause that consequence.
And the cause is not good as those who think by water, for cauterization is not but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humidity which is the cause from which come pains.
But, however, cauterization that is redundant over medicine by the will of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its master.
And it is possible that the disease return at any time of the day, according to the composition of the patient and the location of his disease, and virtue of it; and water that is prepared in the bodies of them by the addition of redundancies in it, and water that has come to them in their consumption of food and similar things of those causes; but if the disease for which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in one member with few redundancies and humidities, then cauterization of a tooth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but it comes by little.
But common speech is that cauterization is the last medicine, and it is a violent speech, not to water that they understand it, for I believe that it is not a cure which profit from medicine or from any other cause; cauterization.
And the cause is opposite to that; and I say that cauterization is the last resort of medicine when we administer the methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not benefit us, and then, at the end of the cause, we administer cauterization to it, and profit from it. And then from here I say that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the speech which I understand from the common people and foolish doctors.
And they say that gold cauterization is better than iron cauterization, and they do not say this water but for the equality of gold and its subtlety.
And they say that the place of cauterization does not burn, when water is absolutely vertue, for I have seen water burning and being burned by that which is not, but in some bodies is greater than others, and cauterization with fire is good and better than iron; but when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not known to you, because it is prepared to receive the heat, and if you place over it ignorance it will burn the gold by the fire, and case in the fire some blades so that the artisan sees for the occupation of that.
And for water it is made cauterization with iron very gently and then more gently to the rectitude of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter in cauterization according to other chapters, and I have ordered those of the within times, so that it answers your asking water that wants it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers on humidity and cold about the accidental injury of which are two causes, so it is a cause of soda and many fluxes of rheumatics, called cursors, from the head to the parts of the neck and ears flowing, and many sleeping, and toothache and gualdiro, and generally of any disease that comes through coldness, thus also with paralysis, and sodo and apoplexio, and similar to those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is this: that you first command the patient who is evacuated by medicine that takes away the head, for three or four nights, according to whether you demand the virtue of the disease and the age of it and its custom.
And then order him to shave his head with a razor, and then he will make points between your hands on a bench and place his hands on the feet of his master.
And then pause the shave of your palm on the edge of the razor over the edge of the nose between the master's ears. Now, however, when the patient has been placed in position, mark the spot with the tip of your finger, and then heat the pointed cautery as follows:
Then place that above the spot where the mark has been made, so that it descends, in a manner so that the patient's hand is gradually tightened, and you rotate that.
Then remove your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if any part of the bone is visible, then raise your hand again, and if it has become cold, then do so with another tip, until you can no longer see the bone through it.
Then take a little salt and dissolve that on the spot and leave it there for three days.
Then place over the affected area in the wound and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. Then heal the spot with the four-part ointment so that it is cured.
And they say that when the plague of Rome opened up, the more it was watered with milk, so that it is better and more refreshing.
And they say that the caustic should be applied to the bone, and that the cautery should burn part of the surface of the bone.
Then let water be applied which is hot from the bone, and then heal it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the back of the bone, so that it pushes it forward with great effort within the bone, and this is how it is applied: They recommend that the vapors of the head be inhaled from that spot.
And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then heal it when it is healed over.
However, I do not see these two kinds of cauterization as necessary, but rather, in certain cases for fear; and let that be done, indeed, if it is good for us, because the head becomes detached by a solution of continuity from the rest of the body, and even more so when the head of the patient is naturally detached.
And the first kind of cauterization is better saved and more useful to me, and from that one I will make a work to save it.
Capitol Second.
Of the cauterization of the head.
When in the whole head chronic and long pain occurs, which persists for a long time in the patient, and uses iron, copper, lead, plaster, salt, castor oil, oil of poppy, and other things, and especially if it has been cauterized with another type of cautery that they describe and do not use, consider that since the head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not pleasant and causes a great pain, then cauterize it with another type of cautery that they have just described. Then cauterize that on the tip of his head with the cautery so that the bone is broken. Then cut the bone and reveal the amount that we have described and cauterize it with another tip at the back of the head in the place called vase, — which is the place where wind is breathed. And let your hand move in this way, and do not reveal the bone, because by water the patient experiences great pain that is different from the pain of all the other types of head cauterization.
And I direct this type of cauterization to its place, for since the cautery with which the tips of the head and the occiput are cauterized is subtler than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; this is the way to do it.
Capitol Third.
Of the cauterization of the empathic.
When a hard pain occurs at the back of the head or a pain within the ear, have the patient remove his head and administer another type of treatment, which I have described in the various diseases; and if it does not respond, then cauterize with two methods: either with burning medicine or with iron.
Then cauterize with burning medicine, which you take in a little glass of ale, and burn it by scraping the ends of the arms with both hands. Then cut the spot where the pain is in the temple with a blade, so that the bone is not revealed, but leave a small space there, so that it is hidden.
Then put a strong pressure on it with descent constriction, and leave it there for three hours; then remove the blade, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place over the affected area in the wound, so that it is not dry.
Then heal that with ointment so that it is healed.
And if you wish, take some of the burning medicines I have written down in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Then cauterize with iron according to this method: heat it so that the tip of the iron becomes red, and then place it on the affected area.
and is called a small claw, since the head has this form of a claw in which there is a curve, and in the middle part of it is a small protrusion.
Then place over the spot where the pain is, and keep your hand away so that the iron is not heated, and turn the iron slowly with speed.
And if the amount of blood that is drawn by the surface of the bone is about half of what it usually is, then raise your hand so that the artery is not drawn, so that the flow does not go out.
Then dip the blade in salt water and place it on the spot, and leave it there for three days; then dip a small blade in the margin, and heal that with ointment so that it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize with the tip of the knife according to cauterization, and be careful not to cut into an artery in this type of empathic disease.
Capitol Fourth.
Of cauterization of ancient empathic.
When you treat empathic with water that we have described in the previous treatment, and with water that we have described in the various diseases of the head; and if the treatment does not respond, and sometimes by the head itself, which does not respond to the treatment, or only to a small part of it; then place the cut-off blade on the spot where the pain is, and make a line with the tip of the knife so that it is white, because this indicates the place where the pain has gone; then pause your hand for a moment, and then heat the iron so that it is red, and place it on the affected area.
However, you must be careful that the Mandible does not continue to move, which disturbs the chewing, and that the tongue is not drawn out and the nerves are not affected, and do not make a spasmodic movement.
And if you are careful about the flow of blood from the artery that is cut off, since when it comes to cutting the artery, there is a great danger, and more so at those where one does not know what it is doing; and then put the operation on hold at the beginning.
And I come back to the memory of the mistake of the flow of blood from the artery according to your way, in its place.
If this type of disease does not respond to this type of cauterization and the patient can tolerate it; then cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have described it, and heal the wound so that it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of stretching the bow string, this cautery has two points, and this is the best cauterization and more effective.
Chapter .v.
On the cauterization of ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear and it is cured by moistening and by the other treatment which I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not go away, then apply the cauterization, and this is what is called puncturing, and its form is as follows:
And then apply the puncturing near the ignition, and direct it towards the whole of the ear as well as a wheel is rotated, or in the circle of any essence if the pain is in any of them. Along with the cauterization of the root of the ear, slowly and little by little as you see the place where it hurts, try to apply the cauterization.
And if the cauterization makes points all over the ear, and then it is cured, and then treat the areas within until they are well.
Chapter .vi.
On the cauterization of torture.
The torture which is cured and the cauterization is not but of the spices which come by flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of the malignities.
Avoid cauterization of the spice which comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that kind of torture by jerks and capipurgies and gargarisms, and do not confer with your treatment, then cover that you cauterize the hernia with three cauterizations: first the root of the ear, second a small cut on the side, third the junction of two lips.
And pause the small cauterization for the opposite of the bad departure, because softening does not happen but in the place which appears healthy.
And the form of the cauterization is that you cauterize it on the right side of the extreme end of the ear, superior to a small point on the tip of the cap, and in the other (left), which should be according to the length of the said foot, and then pause your hand over so that the quantity of the spice of the juice is mixed with the rest.
And this is the shape of the cauterization, and it is special of the knife, the shape of which is before you. But moreover slightly is that this one a little also it has; and cover that the knife in your left hand, a little of superfluous graciness.
And then treat the place with water which is before it is cured until it is well.
Chapter  .vii.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy is in one part with the malignities, and it does not have softening nor sensations of dryness, then cure it with water that we have mentioned, and do not confer with your treatment, and if there is no fever with the hernia, then cauterize that with four cauterizations: all over the tips of its head; also in a small cut on the side, as we have said; and in the throat. And the way of the cauterization is made according to what has been said.
And it is also cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and then come again; and is cured by water which is given to drink.
Chapter .viii.
On the cauterization of oblivion, made by fire:
And that they are given to the hernia in the beginning of jerks and pills, making them spew.
Then return the head of the hernia and place it on the jaw with plaster of Paris as described in the book of plasters.
And pause that a little looked at, because that is a way of cauterizing. Then give it according to that order which I have said.
And if it is well by that, then do not; but if it does not, then make the three cauterizations in the last part of its head, which are separated from the front-most part of the head to the back-most part of the head. And between each cauterization the length of the foot, and then treat the cauterization with water which is done.
But if you add more water to the hernia, then do not make the cauterization in the middle; and if you see more addicion, then cauterize it on the sides of its tips.
Then treat that which is well; and is the cauterization a little olive according to the form which has been given.
Chapter  .ix.
Of the treatment of paralysis and the softening of the entire body.
Cover that you process in the mongificatio of the head after I said; and then cut the head of the patient, and cauterize it at its own place on the head, and cauterize on all the corners of the head, and cauterize on the rear bone of the neck, and three cauteries on the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the softening of the body of the patient and the patience are strong and the softening of the body is severe, then do four cauteries on the spine of the back, and immediately afterwards cauterize within so that it is intertwined with the cord as much as possible, and lift up the patient's hand. Then heal the wound in which he has been burned, and this be a cauterized olive tree.
Chapter X.
Of the treatment of epilepsy.
Is not cauterized the epileptic but that epilepsy is by phlegm.
And therefore cover that you process the patient' brain at the beginning with them and the other treatment which I have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and tolerant of the experience of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not endure the medicines, then administer gargles and make chewed on the servant who processes, before water by mouth for two or three days, with the benefit of food.
Then cut the head of the patient, and cauterize it with one cautery at its own place on the head according to the previous way, and another cautery on the occipital bone of him, and on each corner of the head, seven cauteries. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said, having paraplegically and softening of the body on the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
And be a cauterized olive tree according to what has preceded.
Maybe if the patient is a child, then pause in cauterizing it subtly according to this way.
Chapter XI.
Of the treatment of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and gross phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said in the paralysing.
And if the cause of melancholy is too much decrease leading to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink water that softens the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
Then cut the head of the patient, and make a tortora made gently on it on the circle, and pause it at its own place on the head.
And the patient be sixty cauteries, and let him hold everything.
Then pause linenment; and it is more worthy of a lamb's skin than of a sheep's. And scald it on the fire by warm heat in measure, which he who suffers let him know when it is too much for him. Then leave that at its own place on the patient' head in the circle, and let it cool down.
And give him to drink water to the patient every week once, with another treatment of him that is healed; or if you want, cauterize it with very small points according to what is necessary for him, but keep the hand so ordered: this is a special kind of cautery which softens the brain by equality.
Then pause that cautery made red on the border or in shades of purple.
Chapter XII.
Of the treatment of descending water in the bowels.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the bowels by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens his head, and keep away from all humidities.
And make that water bath in a vessel by day.
Then order him to rub his head, and cauterize it with one cautery at its own place on the head; then cauterize it with two cauteries on two temperatures if it is the beginning of the discharge of water in two bowels, or the one-side-latched if it is the beginning of the discharge of water in a single bowel.
And incise with one cautery all the veins and arteries which are left of the cord; and let the cauteries be in that length on the temperature.
And keep away from flowing blood when it is cauterized; and if the blood flows from him, then stop it with some medicine, which I shall give you, so that it is possible.
And bring me the extract of arnica, and hide those and avoid those which are the causes of blood; and be careful about the flowing blood.
Some times it is cauterized in the neck between two bones with two cauteries produced immediately.
Chapter XIII.
Of the treatment of old tears.
When tears from the bowels are old and wet them well by the veins and arteries which are in the visible place of the head away, and is verified that there is too much watery phlegm, then cauterize it with one cautery which I have told in the beginning of the chapter of water in the bowels, and one cautery at its own place on the head, and two cauteries on two temperatures between the bones of the neck, and two cauteries between the bones of the neck. And if it is by addition, then cauterize it in its whole length from the corner of the eye towards the ear on the upper part of the cheek with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment of the foul smell of the nose.
When you treat it with water as I have said in the division and do not prolong the treatment, then prepare it and give to drink to the patient three times a night; then cut the head of the patient, and cauterize it with half-a-crown's worth of olive oil. Then cauterize it with a small claw'worth on the two cheeks, leaving some hair on them.
And keep away from the fire that does not burn it.
This is the form of the treatment of claw'worth.
Chapter XV.
Of the treatment of softening the eyelids of the bowels.
When the eyelid of the bowel is softened by sickness or humidity, then cauterize it with one cautery according to this cautery lunar; and this is the form of him:
And if you want, cauterize it on the two cheeks with a small amount of claw'worth and olive oil. Let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the cheek.
Do not press too much on your hand with the cauterizing, but according to the quantity that a third part of the eyelid is moved away.
Chapter XVI.
Of the treatment of the eyelids of the bowel when the hair is converted to the inside and turns the bowel inwardly.
When the hair of the bowel is converted to the inside in such a way that it turns the bowel inwardly, then treat it according to two ways; either cauterize it or give him medicine with fire.
And if it is cauterized by fire, order the patient to drink water which softens his hair in such a way that it is removed and kept in order; and if it turns inwardly, then strengthen the eyelids of the patient with some cloth so that he does not hurt himself inside; and if it is a nas-turn, then bind the eyelids of him with something so that they are not wounded.
So he rises up and places his head between the patient's thighs and a servant sits on his chest, another one on his legs and another at the feet, holding the hands.
Then place a cotton ball in an alum of the eye or a wet cotton wisp over the eyelid.
And then light the cautery, this is its form.
Then cauterize the figure that you have outlined, little by little, until the surface of the nodule is burned away so that it appears like a leaf of mint, completely.
The health of the procedure is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the eyebrows raised due to the puncture of the eyelid.
So then raise your hand and place it on him for three days, and then light the cautery, this is its form. Then heal that with ointment so that it heals.
Maybe if for some reason the hair falls out and the eyelid becomes soft again, then do the cauterization again all over.
Maybe if the hair is on the eyelid, then cauterize that so that it rises to its natural place and is tucked in so that the eyebrows do not touch the eyelid.
Maybe the cauterization is done with a medicine that burns so order the servant to pluck the hair where it is long and tucked in, and then make a cotton ball into an alum of mint leaf.
Then dip it in a strong salt water solution and in a living worm. Here is the final line of the text: Here is the final line of the text:
And then hold it on the medicine for a little while and do not let go until the servant feels the burning of the medicine, since the burning is in it.
So then when the servant perceives that the medicine burns, then release the medicine and hold it on the patient's thigh; after it stops burning, then wash the medicine off with water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been raised in this way because it is washed away due to the contraction of the skin caused by the heat or cut, since it is good; and if not, then return to the medicine on the spot where there is no medicine left so that your operation is complete and the eyelid is lowered.
Then place over it a border so that the nodule of the swelling is eradicated, and then heal that with ointment if it falls out or with another one until it heals.
It is necessary for you to guard your operation with great vigilance so that the medicine does not fall into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes soft due to some cause of hair falling out and touching the eye, then repeat your medicine on that spot where the eyelid is soft, indeed, do it again from the beginning, and then turn it over so that it heals.
This is the form of mint leaf.
And you know that the eyelids of men are different from each other according to their size and age, so your contraction is appropriate for each.
Do not change the medicine for anyone who is studying this craft.
Chapter XVII.
Of Cauterization of the fistula which is in the eye's tear duct.
When you treat the fistula with water which we have said in the division of the eyelids and do not confer your treatment, then cover it so that you cauterize that according to this way: order the servant to place his head between the patient' thighs, and hold his hair tightly from behind in such a way that he does not frown or move his head.
Then place a cotton ball infused with alum on the eyelid of the patient.
And then light the cauterization which is this form:
is shaped like a cane or a feather of an eagle, from one end which is made to be the cauterization.
And if you see it, go through to the other end. And if you want it to be sharp like this.
But nevertheless, that which is sharp is better for the work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it with a syringe and dry it out. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then place over the cauterization which is well lit, and with the patient' hand a little away from the cauterization at the root of the nose so that your hand does not get burned or the servant disturbed, then place the cauterization on the edge of the eyelid and burn it out.
So then if at the beginning of the eyelid's cauterization bone is broken, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization a few times or twice, if necessary; and then leave that placed on him for three days, and then place over it a border and surround it with dried-out ointment so that it heals.
Maybe if it has passed eleven days and it is not healed, then place over the medicine of sharp corruption so that the bone is discovered and shaved according to what is written in the chapter of its surgery.
This is another way of cauterizing the fistula which they said at first: go to the site of the fistula and cut through it with a sharp knife and then place in that crack, thin as a hair, the amount of liquid lead; and then hold your hand well away from it, and do not let the lead reach the eyelid of the patient so that it does not cause pain for the servant, and cover it with a cotton ball infused with alum or water, since the lead adheres to its place and heals it miraculously.
So if the fistula is healed with water which we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a little through the nose and reduce the fistula to its root according to what comes out of its place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of Cauterization of the wound which is in the hair of the forehead.
The appearance of red spots and cracks on the lips, and mostly on those of children.
So when you treat those cracks with water which we have said in the division of skin diseases and do not confer your treatment, then light the small knife according to this form which is carved out:
Is shaped like a knife's blade.
Then place that carefully in those cracks so that the cauterization reaches their edge.
Then heal that with cerums within which heals.
Chapter XIX.
Of Cauterization of the wound on the forehead.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth there is an abscess which bursts, and then it is broken and crusted over, and then it becomes a fistula, and then you do not confer your treatment, then cover it so that the cauterization burns according to the quantity which is received in the fistula, and then place the burning cauterization on the edge of the fistula, and then hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches its edge; and at its end it makes a little burn, one time or twice; and then heal that with water which we have said about the treatment, so that it heals.
And so if the wound is severed and heals well, then it is good; but if not, it is necessary to uncover the site and clean out the rotten bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter .XX.
On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Veins.
When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, and you apply remedies to them and do not bind them, then place the cap of the patient on their thigh, and immediately ignite the cautery in the form that will come into contact, so that you place the tongs over the tooth and pierce it with the cautery quickly, and hold the jaw tightly with a little knot so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And then remove your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times according to what you want.
And then place the patient's mouth in a cup of salty water and keep it there for an hour, and afterwards, wash it out, for the loose tooth is tightened and the softened gum is hardened and the corrupting moisture is dried up.
Chapter .XXI.
On the Cauterization of Toothache.
When toothache is caused by cold, or it stings or burns, and does not respond to remedies applied with medicine, then cauterization is performed in two ways: with the help of a cow's milk or with fire.
Cauterization with Cow's Milk: You take cow's milk and boil it in a pot, and then immediately dip the part of the jaw where the toothache is into the hot milk, and hold it over the painful tooth quickly so that it steams.
And repeat this several times until the heat of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you see it, dip wool or a cloth in the milk above its root, and hold it over the painful tooth, and place a hot iron over the site where the root of the teeth is located.
But the cauterization with fire is that you take care not to burn the patient' side where the toothache is, and that the thickness of the skin does not prevent the heat of fire from reaching the root of the teeth.
And ignite the cautery in the form that will come into contact, and hold it over the tooth, and your hand within that the cauterization is completed; and make some preparations because the pain may return or on that day or the next day.
And so, because of the impression of that cauterization, the patient should fill his/her mouth with good milk and keep it for an hour and then wash it out; and this is the form of the cauterization.
And cauterize with whatever you can reach as is possible for you.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter  .XXII.
On the Cauterization of Extrophulus.
When extrophulus is made of slimy and fussy humors that do not respond to medicine and you see the digestive process of those slightly, then ignite the cauterization in the form that is this one, having two open ends so that fire reaches the other end, and hold it ignited over the abscess once, and another if you feel it necessary, as long as it reaches the root of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then hold the cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days, and place it over a cloth in the form of a bandage so that the fire burns it up.
And then wash it with water and try to bind it and wrap it up so that it is healed.
Chapter .XXXIII.
On the Cauterization of Sores and Constriction of Air.
When the humidities come up from the lungs, and mainly when the air is cold or of low temperature, then empty the patient first with laxative medicine, and then cauterize the root of the sore in the place where it is stuck.
And guard that you do not apply the cauterization to the throat or burn with fire the cord of the air, but a little bit only.
And cauterize that with another cauterization where the collarbone is located at the back of the spine. The order of cauterization should be as follows: first, empty the patient with laxatives; second, cauterize the root of the sore in the stuck place; third, cauterize where the collarbone is located at the back of the spine.
And then wash it with water that has preceded it so that it is healed.
Chapter  .XXIX.
On the Cauterization of Sores of the Lungs and Coughing.
Cuando la tos y la mala respiración de los pulmones son causadas por humores fétidos y el paciente no tiene fiebre o tos, y es una mala respiración antigua, entonces cauterice ese con dos cauterizaciones en la furcula en las ubicaciones pegadas al hueso; y otra cauterización en el lugar medio del pie entre dos mamos; y sea la cauterización clavilh según la forma anterior.
And if you want, you can also have your cautery be made into points that are called puncta, the form of which is applied to the pain of the ears.
And make points within these holes; and then cure them with hot water that precedes within them, so that they are healed.
And now have three cauterizations, for the cauterization is made this way: from one you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter .XXV.
Of Cauterization of the Titillium, which is the Head of the Ajutor.
When the head of the ajutor is displaced by means of lubricating moisture and does not remain fixed in its return, you should reduce the displacement within it, and then, after a small movement, dislodge it so that it returns; for we have witnessed this, reduce the displacement initially, and then, on a small movement, dislodge it, so that it returns; and appropriately raise the tail, which is in the beginning of the titillium, to the posterior part, and raise the rope, which is at the beginning of the title, to the posterior part, with the help of your left hand.
And make two cauterizations that have two heads; and this is the form:
And then cauterize the cord within, so that it passes into one from the other part; and then you will see the figure of the cauterization, after three heads have been made.
And in some places it is adjusted according to that count, so that the cauterizations are.VIII.
And then place over the cauterization, on which salt is spread, and then make it adhere to the member with tranquility, so that it is not pained for any time until it has been comforted.
And if the displacement is to the posterior part and it returns, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or a sharp cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is moistened and the intestine is healed.
Chapter  .XXVI.
Of Cauterization of the Stomach.
When the stomach is dripping and multiplies the humidities within it, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confer with them, then, when the intestine is placed on its back, raise its sides and extend them, and then cauterize it with three cauterizations: one cauterization leaves the foot open for a quantity of a digit in a cauterization that is sharp, and two cauterizations leave the sides of the two sides of the cauterization, so that the figure of the triangular cauterization comes out; and then make between those that are not adjusted, which will cause a crackling sound.
And if the depth of the cauterization is according to the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the cord.
And be the figure of the cauterization according to this form three additions, And if you want, cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cauterization according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And the stomach is to be cauterized with a point on it that frightens you: and this is because you are aware of the stomach's pain according to the quantity that you want to make, then cauterize it with a point; and then cure it with a treatment that precedes within it so that it is healed.
Chapter .XXVII.
Of Cauterization of the Femur Joint.
When pain in the femur is caused by cold or humidity or by thick vapors within its normal configuration, and if you do not confer with it, then, when the intestine is placed on its back, so that it does not disturb the patient, three cauterizations are made according to this form, and this quantity of cauterization is applied above the femur from the hip joints, the hour that turns the bed of the patient.
And be the space between each cauterization according to the length of a digit, and be the cauterization according to the length of the right side of the body.
Do not compress it with your hand while making the cauterizations.
And if the quantity of water that is applied is according to the majority of the thickness of the cord, and it is not adjusted; and if the intestine is placed on its feet; and if it does not remain so, then let it be laid down, which has already extended its coysas, and raise its brasses.
You can also make these cauterizations with a sharp cauterization, when it is in your power and subtility and prudence in the art.
And keep in mind that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and be applied to the thickness of all the cord so that it is applied to all the body and reaches within the budels, for the cord here is delicate; and know how to apply it.
Chapter  .XXVIII.
Of Piercing an Abscess in the Femur with Cauterization.
When an excision or abscess is caused in the femur, and you want to know if it is in the bone's meat or in its skin, if it is in the bone's meat, then the intestine is drawn with gravity and there is acute pain.
And if it is in the skin of the femur, then the pain becomes great and often disturbs the joints.
Then, when the intestine is placed on its back, so that it does not disturb the patient's neck; and then feel the place of the abscess with your hand; and then cauterize it with one of those that is sharp, the shape of which has preceded in the previous page. And then cauterize it with one and within that all the cord is combined, so that it reaches the cipha, so that it is cured in a fire.
And then cure it with treatment of other abscesses so that it is healed.
I do not know how to use this form of cauterization except for that which is mentioned in the art of medicine, and has experienced some good results by trying it out; but, however, it should be left alone, and this one is better.
Chapter   .XXXIX.
Of Cauterization of Wounds.
They said that the small cauterizations of the scalpel to wound are made according to this method; and this is what you take from the small scalpel a long hair, and it is of the thickness of a digit.
And then submerge it in oil and heat it with fire, and then cauterize it with a small cauterization at that place that is between the continuos of the furcula to the neck; and two small cauterizations are left on either side, a few drops lower down on the side that is cut, and two small cauterizations in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the chin, declining a little lower on the sides behind; and one small cauterization at the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three small cauterizations on the sides behind; and one small cauterization at that place that is between the two shoulders, and two small cauterizations on the sides of the foot, left the small cauterization that is between the two shoulders.
And do not compress your hand while making the cauterizations; but rather, in the action of the cord' s work.
Here is the translation of the text:
Nor is there any fear of this opening with the cautery; for often it happens in that place which is a fistula, and there is no cure.
Chapter .iii.
Of the Melting of the Meat.
When you treat the disease of the meat with water, having already said concerning the treatment in the division and not conferring your treatment, then cauterize it with fire according to three ways, all of which are right; one is that you make three or four cauterizations or more according to the length of the meat according to the figure of the cauterization of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
And between each cauterization there is a little bit of meat or less, and the manner of the cauterization is the same as we have said in the cauterization of the foot;
And do not place your hand on the cauterization; and the hernia be placed on its back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cauterization having two sparks, which causes have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the thread which is in the back of the meat so that it pierces the tendon of the hernia without hurting the patient.
And your elevation is made in such a way that you raise the thread according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the thickness of the flesh.
And place two sparks on each side, ignite the one, in that place where the thread enters from the other side.
Then remove the cauterization; and there are four cauterizations.
And if you see this, cauterize with three sparks.
Then cure the cauterization that has not been burned for many days, because it is more certain than other causes preceding in treatment.
Chapter 31.
Of the Cauterization of Hydropicy.
Cauterize not in hydropic disease but specifically in alcint.
When you treat the hydropic disease with treatment that has been said in the division and not confer your treatment, then be aware that those who cauterize in four places around the navel and one on the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the meat, and two between the spines of the back, and one on the right foot, and one on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization is appropriate to the thickness of the thread.
Then let the cauterization remain open that it gets burned for a long time.
And you do not evacuate the hernia during treatment by applying water to the cauterization so that two drops are added to it, and the third is spun; and this is done with the help of cure.
The form of the cauterization applied to the belly is clawed according to whether its previous form was flat or round; and this is the one with which the two sides are olive-shaped according to what precedes in its form.
Chapter 32.
Of the Cauterization of the Feet and Thighs.
When the feet are apostemated with hydropic disease and are full of watery urine, then cauterize the toes between the second and third metatarsal bone, lifting your hand with the cauterization and not returning it; for the watery urine will dry up.
This is the form of the cauterization: And make two points on each thigh; in each one, a point is made at the end of the cautery knife. And the cauterization according to the length of the thigh: and two points are made on the other side, and at the ends of the thigh; and two points on each thigh.
Then leave the wound open for a long time treatment so that some urine is discharged from it.
Then cure it with those causes that I have said.
Chapter 33.
Of the Cauterization of the Belly.
When the belly is cut and moist with water that destroys the virtues contained within it, which are in the stomach and intestines, then treat it with treatment that has been said; and sometimes the patient suffers from a vertiginous cauterization, then cauterize it with a large cauterization on its back according to what precedes in the cauterization of the stomach, around the navel and four cauterizations on the circuit of the small intestine, one cauterization that is clawed; and one cauterization on the liver or two.
And if the patient tolerates abundant moisture and water, then cauterize it on the pentel and the intestines, and strongly fix two cauterizations on the stomach and between the inguinas; for this is an excellent treatment to promote the healing of which there is no other remedy.
Chapter 34.
Of the Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
When the nature is of old hemorrhoids or a humor that is thick and moist with corrupt moisture, then it is cured by applying water that has been said in the division and not conferring your treatment, then cauterize with three cauterizations on the upper sides of the small spines of the back and on the little triangle that goes up to the ombelicus, and one above the ombelicus going down, and two between the spines of the back.
And if you judge that the stomach is swollen and the diet is not digested, and the face sometimes becomes apostemated, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cauterization according to what precedes; and one on the foot, and another on the meat of it with a clawed cauterization; and leave the cauterization open for some time, and cure it within that which is cured.
Chapter .xxxv.
On cauterization of hernias, consider the removal of their contents.
When you remove aths, then heat the cautery that is assembled at its tip. Then enter this fire into this removed ath, and place your hand near that hole through which the blood flows out.
And make one cut or two, because if they are deep, then cauterize each of them according to what we have counted, and quickly treat those that are burned in their center so that they may be healed.
And if you cauterize a large cautery on top of the wound, it is better to delay it for a while.
Chapter .xxxvi.
On cauterization of fistulas that are formed naturally in the legs.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended at its place, and the patient is frightened by water, then heal with cautery.
Therefore when there is a fistula in nature that comes out, and it is old, cure it with fire and corrupt moisture, and then water that is put on should be dry, so that it may not return to the place of the old fistula.
Then heat the cautery that seems like a flame. And then enter this fire into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it enters the tent.
And repeat on that fire as much of the corrumpted blood as one, two, or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
And keep away from burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the leg of the bladder or to the hernia, then keep away from all these places; and do not apply water unless the fistula is in a meaty place and you think it may penetrate.
Then quickly treat those places so that they may be healed.
And if the place is sealed and the contents are removed from it, and it remains closed for a long time, then know that it has been completely healed.
And if the contents are not kept in the leg, then know that it is penetrating or corrupting the flesh in the pubic area, and that water from those causes will come out at its place.
Chapter  .xxxvii.
On cauterization of the nose.
When the nostrils are painful due to cold or strong wind, and because of this the patient's breath is short, then heal with cautery on each nostril with a pointed cautery from which the memory returns.
And firmly cauterize the second with a small cut, so that three small lines of fire will come out, and then delay for a while longer.
Chapter .xxxviii.
On cauterization of the bladder.
When a person experiences pain and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it in two places at its opening, starting with the left side, and cauterizing on the right side.
And make the length of each cautery according to the quantity of urine; and cauterize it with a cautery in two places at its lower end, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And do so with a pointed cautery as it passes through.
Chapter  .xxxix.
On cauterization of the largest one.
When the largest one experiences cold and moisture, so that it is prevented from becoming pregnant, and its menstrual blood is corrupted, and the time of its appearance is delayed, and then heal with cautery on a place near the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery at the lower end of the two places, or with two cauteries, and with a pointed cautery.
Chapter  .xl.
On cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When moist air is spread on the ankle's opening, and because of this the ankle's joint is moved to its place, and it is noticed that the cushion is prolonged on the other side when compared with this one. And the dislocated place is turned toward the leg.
Then heal the patient on the ankle' side with a cautery that seems like a flame, so that you do not feel the tent on the circle of the opening, and so that it may fall onto the leg' side.
And this is the cautery from which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
If you do not have this cautery, then heal it with three small cauteries on one large cautery.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the bitterness of the whole juice; and quickly heal that which is inside.
Chapter   .xli.
On cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle' opening, and because of this cold and moisture cause it, then heal the patient with water that we have mentioned, and do not apply it, for if you do, then old water will be made; then heat up a small cautery and pass it on that place.
And the way of the cautery in that place is according to two ways: or cauterize it with burning medicines, or cauterize it by fire.
The second is that you cauterize it on the back' side of the leg with three triangles-shaped cauteries, and make them deep. And space between each cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the juice; and if the cautery is small or large.
A few steps later, add a cautery on the middle of the leg to that place because it is four cauteries.
If you wish, then cauterize it with a large circle that is passed over the dislocated leg' side, and burn all the bitterness of the juice.
This is the way to cauterize in cytiqua when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend within the cushion.
And if it is extended within the cushion, then heal it with two cauteries on each side of the cushion where the leg is placed; and add a cautery over the joint for four small ones that are slightly painful.
And if the cauterize is by cutting, and make the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the bitterness of the juice.
And if the patient feels that pain is extended within the place of the leg' side, then heal it with a cautery where the pain extends for three points or four or more if you feel it from there.
And if the patient feels that pain is on the other side of the leg' joint, then heal it with a cautery by cutting.
And keep away from any cauterization that causes great pain or burning of nerves, and that may damage the leg' side; and do not apply water unless it is on the leg' side, and do not pour it out.
You have already seen one of those, which I cauterized on the joint, and the last one in cauterization, and the fire blew up all over it, and burned it through and through. Then a great relief came to the stomach, and death followed soon after.
And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each according to this method.
And the wise ones said in the cauterization of water cautery from which this is the way: make a similar circle of iron, where the circuit is most of a palm; and is due to his orifice according to the thickness of a finger or two fingers.
And within that circle is another third; and is the quantity of the nail of the foot; and those circles are open from two parts; and the length of these pegs is one or two nails, and make in those margins of iron appropriately dressed in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then set fire to it in the fire within so that it burns and gets sparks, and place it on the part of the water, the patient lying on his back. And then cauterize that a three cauterizes rounded in one face.
And then leave it for three days; then plaster that a with tar and leave the wound open for seven days; and then heal that a within.
Diys Al-Bubakis: O, son, of this species of cauterization we have few used for the terror of looking at it, and because there are few that look at him.
More of the bloodletting cauterizations to him who suffered them, and turns back his attention to him.
May cauterize with medicinal acids it is that you make two circles of a ring-shaped iron, where they should be the bolt of the door of iron; be the length of the part in the thickness of them are two nails or more of those.
And if the space is that quantity of the thickness of it; and are open from below and above, and are so they contain each other according to this form:
And then place it on the part of the water, the patient lying on his back, and compress your hand over the part of the water; and take a little tail of water between two circles, and its quality is that of a small fire little by little, and let him suffer for the quantity of an hour, and bear the patient's bite and adhesion to it -- since such a bite does so when on fire -- until the adhesion ceases.
And then raise your hand to the instrument and wash off the tail of water from all the water.
And then leave it for three days and place it on the border within so that the blackness of the adhesion remains fresh, and leave it for a few days, and run over it with a red-hot iron; this is last to heal.
And then heal that a within fire.
And if the pain is spread within the cushion or the sole of the foot, make it standing on the surface that contains water according to how it was made in the water.
And this is the way of tail of water, and I have already written that in the treatise of the correction of medicines. Take of alkali and of a non-extended cause of both in one part a new wave of which the part is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
Then suspend the base of the other wave waved, and gets over that alkali and alive cause of double water the quantity for one nail, and then you compress those with your hand by good compression, and leave the hole that sends away him from it into the wave that is suspended.
Then adjust all that water, and get it over the other alive cause and another alkali, because that one in a strong way aggravates it, which is administered in the pills of medical operations and cauterization of the other members, since operation does by fire.
And then from some medicines those with which it is cauterized a few, thus quickly it is mixed and a sabored cause added to them so that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounted of a man the operation and cure with which he is healed of the pain of the ankle and sciatic vein, and magnified very much to be that, and said that there is no need for other cure, and because it is cured by one day so that it is healed, since it is fort of him, that intrec in a bath already known.
And it is that it is pressed of certain herbs, and if not it is shaken green, a little dried; and three times mixed with a little salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or in the cushion, or in the sole of the foot, and left lying.
And it is left for the quantity of three hours, or for the quantity that the patient counts five times to be quiet.
And then put it in a bath, and when the body of him is heated, place it on the sole, since the pain ceases and is healed.
And you know that there is no need for anyone to cauterize with this medicine except by evacuating the body.
May Ja Escorides also said that when the hole of a goat the vein is tightened, it is better; and the cauterization with it by this method: take wool and soak in old oil, and place it between the feet of the foot and between the toes.
And then take dry goat's hole and inflame that with fire within so that it is made of charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it until it is dried up. And then repeat water, and does not cease to water within so that the feeling of the bite reaches the water in which the pain is repeated.
This way of cauterization is called cauterization of cows.
Chapter LII.
On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Parts.
Some days pain is in the two parts by two causes, and if by injury or percussion or excessive evacuation, and similar to those, by infusion of rubbing material and wet.
And cauterization does not have any other special category than that which is made by infusion of rubbing material.
Therefore, if the pain is in two parts together according to the latitude of the foot, then make pills with a third part, and add it to one of them so that each has half of the amount; since there are differences between patients' tolerances and the virtue of water.
And let it be made cauterization with a pointed cauterize.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauterizes or four in which the middle one is made according to this form:.
Chapter LXII.
On the Cauterization at the Beginning of Gilberness.
Moans witnessed in this sickness appear in small children; and the beginning of it is seen when a child's body grows taller than usual, with greater movement.
And feelers in the latter spinal segment of the back and of the neck begin to rise above the others.
And when you see this and want to stop it, then cauterize that which is pointed in this way: to take the cautery on all sides of the spinal segment.
And if you want, then cauterize around the spinal segment with a pointed cautery, two or three lines. Then make points close together.
Then clean up the area well:
Keep in mind that the cautery should not be administered in a painful area caused by muscle spasms.
Chapter .xliv.
On Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, when gout is treated with a method of cure that does not cause further pain, then the cauterization that causes pain must be stopped.
And it is because you cauterize that which is an evacuation in the circuit of the foot's joint with a pointed cautery.
And this is the shape of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain radiates within the neck or towards other joints, and this happens frequently: then cauterize each one of these three or four times in turn with this olive cautery.
And if the number of these cauterizations is great for you: then cauterize it and do not press too hard with the cautery before doing so, only to surround the joint's skin.
And if the pain radiates within the neck and back: then administer the cautery I mentioned in the previous chapter.
And if the pain only occurs in one place and is called sugar: then make points in the circuit of the fire as it revolves, making points in these two lines.
And if the pain remains in the legs: then make points on the circuit of the fire on each thigh and on the hand' s palm.
And if the pain radiates towards the sides or towards the muscles: then cauterize each one of these on all sides of the limbs.
And do not evacuate bad habits or receive medicines properly: because if it is done well and the fire is extinguished with this cautery, God will help it.
Chapter .xlv.
On Broken Bones.
When there is a fracture in the pelvic bones and the intestines come out before the birth, and this begins to happen: then cover the patient with a blanket and let them rest, so that the wound does not open from the navel.
Then follow the patient between your hands on their back, and order them to keep their back straight so that the uterus does not drop or emerge intestines.
Then return it to the patient's side and hold it there with your hand, trying to break the bone at the top of the hip bone with the end that looks like a half-circle at the bottom of the spine.
And this is the shape of it:
in a place where there is fire, and make points that cause fever and cause pain. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient' s thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand, holding it straight, and take it inside so that you can reach the bone at the top of the hip bone in the middle of the back; and repeat this several times if you do not get it on the first try, moving to another point if necessary.
Then observe with care during the cauterization that the intestine does not burn, so that there is no danger to the patient or any other great evil.
And you know that when you have bone with the cautery, do not continue your work.
The cauterization of small children should be gentle according to their age and size.
Then clean up the area of the cauterization for three days, keeping it free from dirt so that the fire does not spread there.
Then clean up with water, so that it is cured.
The patient should remain on their back for 30 days, keeping the area where the cauterization was done clean and free from infection.
Then pause the patient' s nutrition according to the length of time for the treatment: that the uterus does not drop and the intestines do not burn due to effort at healing.
Then when you want to take it away after 30 days, administer it well and keep it there for another 30 days.
It should be a matter of work and filling the stomach with food and drink: and fervently, because when one uses this complete method of cure, God will help it.
Then view the cure for other fractures in the belly: and at the beginning, if you want to stop it, then cauterize that which is broken with a pointed cautery according to its quantity; and this is what is removed from the navel and back again: and clean up with water, so that it is not adjusted.
And others say that the first fracture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, because it is marked by a half-circle:
And pause the line that runs through the length in the bottom of the half-circle, and another line above it; then place your hand on a pointed cautery, but first the first cauterization should be lighter and better.
Chapter .xlix.
On Twisting.
When the limbs are twisted due to a fall or hit: and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medication: then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
It is the cauterization of each limb according to its size and age, and its virtue and development: and its location and pain.
Therefore, if after the first cauterization it is cured: then repeat it; but if not, then repeat the cauterization: because it is often the case that those pains are caused by punctures in that member that causes pain in another member; so that you can cure it with the cauterizations I mentioned.
Chapter  .xlvii.
On Leprosy.
Lepers are cured with a great amount of cauterization, and gently if the leper is infected by fire and melancholy.
And if you want to cauterize it, consider whether the leper is infected with fire: and cure it with water that I mentioned in the division and not otherwise, neither does this harm nor does this harm cover all of it: then cauterize it on the head, at the middle place of the forehead, and at the second place on the left side, going to the front from the middle point of the hair; and both on the two corners; and one behind, on the back of the neck or serviz.
And finally place your hand over the cautery a little way in so that it seizes the bone with a small pressure and the scorching, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize on the limb according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy is already widespread over the loins and clearly visible, then cover that you cauterize those cauterizes which we have said in the head; and on the nose, and on two cauterizes on the two testicles, and on two cauterizes on two spondils of the neck, and on four cauterizes on the spondils of the shoulder, and on one great above the shoulders, and on the collarbone, and on two on the hips, and on each hip, and on two on the knees and on one on the tendons of his leg; and cauterize that over all the joints of the said muscles and feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the knuckles of their feet.
And keep away from the nerves which are above the tendon that you do not burn those.
And some are cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the little finger and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the thigh.
And know that the more you apply cauterizes, the more it is relieved and confirmed; and know that the loins do not feel pain in cauterization, for as long as the blood vessels are not affected, so the body of him does not feel it.
And know that the cauterizes are great or few according to the limbs and joints according to what comes before with the spices of the instruments.
Then clean the cauterize with flour of eru, and with honey, and with the other cure within so that it is healed.
Chapter. XLVIII.
Of Cauterization for Stupor.
When a member is stiffened or numb and is treated with medicine, oils, and ointments, and it does not heal, then you cauterize that stiffened member according to what it deserves whether the size of the member or its smallness.
And may this little cautery enter the essence of the rope a little way. Then clean that with oil within so that it is healed.
And some are cauterized with a certain stupor that extends to the head and feet, and to the spondyl of the neck, and to the eyes of the nerves that move that member, and the stupor returns.
Do not add more than this unless you know about the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire body.
Chapter. XLI.
Of Cauterization for Scars that are deformities.
When old scars are ugly and do not conform to any of the medicines' ointments, then you cauterize that with a cautery a little way according to the essence of the rope within so that it is renewed white and the color of it, and the color of it is changed.
Then clean that with flour of eru and lentil flour with olive oil rose and leaf of arnica, and a mixture of sage or yarrow, each in part and all mixed together, and return a cloth to the area within so that it is healed.
Chapter. I.
Of Cauterization for Crani.
When cancer has begun and you want to cut off that arm, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the direction of its rotation.
And the wise said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in its location; but I have not seen it, for I think that it is ulcerated, and I have already seen it a few times.
And it is better that it should be cauterized in the direction of its movement with a circle as we have said, or a few cauterizes.
Chapter. II.
Of Cauterization for Burned.
When it is burned by fire or injury and the flames, and it is painful and troublesome, then you cauterize that with a small circle of cauterization around the fire or injury, and the delay and trouble are removed. When a burn is delayed in maturity, either because of excess fat making it late, or age making it old in decay, and time causing it to mature quickly, then cauterize it with small pointed cauterizes; and let it lie for those who want to hurry its maturity.
But if you want the piercing of it with cauterization, then you light that cauterize from which this is the form of it: and leave it in the middle of the burn location within so that it penetrates.
And if the cauterize in that place is left behind, so that the body of the arm is relieved; and clean that within so that it is healed.
Chapter. II.
Of Cauterization for Corrosion.
Corrodent is walking corruption in the limb, which corrupts that as if it were eating dry wood with fire.
Therefore if that corrupter is in a place where it suffers cauterization with fire, then you light cauterizes small and pointed, and large according to what is appropriate in the place where it is corrupted.
Then clean that completely within so that you remove all corrosion and do not cause further corruption from it.
Then leave that alone for three days, and let it stand with the cauterized areas dried up within so that the scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is gone.
Then clean that with ointments of pregnancy.
But if after three days the meat is born healthy where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that which is rotted in the areas of corruption.
Corrodent is treated sometimes with sharp medicine, for that is half a place instead of cauterization. But yet cauterization with fire is much more useful.
And I have already said that the cure for it is sharp medicine in division, and now take that when you need it urgently.
Chapter. III.
Of Cauterization for Claws and the Others.
A few times the claw of the leg becomes damaged and is called claw, and it is a gross cause, causing the leg to limp; and cauterize those two ways, either with fire cauterization or water cauterization.
But yet cauterize with fire is that you ignite the cauterization as if it were a light, which is done from iron according to how much it contains the claw in all parts, and be of fine edges.
Then let that ignite on the claw, and return your hand to the cauterization in the direction of the claw within so that the cauterization reaches its depth. And leave it for three days until it begins to burn a brac. Then apply a paste of dried wild mallows, cut into strips and soaked in salt, to it for a night, because it will remove the roots.
And then clean the wound with a poultice of fresh meat extract until it is healed.
And if they don't turn black and there is a small blister on the surface of the body, mostly on the feet, then you will treat it with fire; because you have taken a little piece of hair or iron or stone from a volley, and place it on the knuckle; then pour a small amount of water on the piece, cover your hand, and turn it over so that the water drips onto the blister; and wait an hour for the water to cool off at the root of the finger nail; then remove it, because the nail will fall out.
And in this way treat all of them one by one until they are all healed.
And then clean the blisters that the roots of the fingers have been removed with water from the poultices that the meat has generated.
Chapter III.
On Gout.
When there is a feverish tremor due to friction in the nerves or due to some other similar cause, then you will treat it by applying four different cauterizations or five on the joints of the feet, one cauterization between each joint; and one cauterization on the feet, and another on the stomach, and another with an olive.
And this tremor will cease and the recovery from the fever will speed up.
Chapter L.
On accidental wounds in the body.
When there are raw wounds in the body, and pustules are formed which are filled with thick corrupted matter; then at first sight, treat it with a very slight cauterization on the entire length of the fistula with an iron rod, the end of which is heated; or with a long chisel; or with a slow cauterization.
And some blisters are opened at the beginning of their discharge according to this way; and they do not become infected, and the fluid is eliminated without pain, and they heal from them.
But nevertheless, when there is a lot of fluid, it should be evacuated with bleeding.
Chapter LVI.
On the flow of blood due to the incision of an artery.
Too much blood flow due to a wound or an incision in the limb; or because of the rupture of a vessel, and it is difficult to stop it.
Then take care to tie the artery with your hand at its orifice, and place your thumb over it to stop the flow of blood below the knot, and not let it drip.
Then apply a few large and slow burning olive cauterizations to it, and blow over them until they are set on fire.
Then take care to apply the same cauterization quickly to the place where the artery has burst; and if you should die before you can stop the flow of blood, then treat it with a rapid cauterization until you stop the bleeding.
And if the blood flows out of the artery's orifice while you are tying it up and the cauterization is burning; then take care to apply another cauterization quickly to the place where the blood is escaping, before you stop the bleeding.
And be careful not to burn the nerve here; and that it does not affect the patient with any other evil.
And you should know that when the artery bleeds, it is not possible to stop the bleeding by tying it up, and certainly not when the artery is large; if you tie it up, the extremities will burn and the blood will be stopped with pain, or you will stretch it too much, or it will be held with a cord or a thread tightly, or it will be laid on medicine that stops the bleeding of the wound; and they are stretched by means of a pillow.
But that which is administered with a thread or a string tightly, and burned by means of medicine or similar causes, does not succeed very well.
But if there is a little blood here, and no medicine or remedy is present, then open the knot of the thread above the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand well the great constriction of it within the body when the pulse is strong; and over the artery pour cold water with a large degree of coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and sew with sutures where you need to cauterize or apply medicine.
On Incisions, Punctuations, and Bleedings, and on Bleeding and Plagues, and their Similarities.
We have spoken in the first chapter about all the diseases that are treated with fire and medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments which are necessary for the shapes of the cauterizations; and we have arranged the chapters of the sub-header of the head within the feet.
And we will continue in this chapter to arrange them for those who want them, so that they may find what they seek.
And in advance of me, know that, for terror, what I have spoken about in the first chapter of cauterization is sufficient.
And for the body that is in great danger, because in the operation described in this chapter there is a blister due to blood flowing from a vein or incision on an abscess or opening of an ulcer or plucking out a箭or from the flesh or cutting with a hook and similar things; And all of them are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in addition to them there is danger of death.
And I warn you that, upon yourself, not such a thing should fall, because some wounds may fall into your hands in ways which are difficult to treat; and there are some diseases that are difficult to heal. And some of them are so difficult that they will end in death if not treated quickly; and because of the length of their illness, and because of the difficulty of the disease itself.
And those are the ones that give you hope and happiness, while waiting for the healing of that person, but his disease is destructive.
And do not consent that someone come to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than your fear and your haste; and do not assume any cause about him except a certain knowledge which certifies it to you; and to whom success is blessed.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases by prediction and indication; for in this is the saving of your life, because it helps you to gain fame and memory, honor and glory.
Or children, God in you inspire understanding; do not seek his direction or protection, because it is in his hand.
And I have arranged this chapter differently, according to the chapters that precede it in the chapter of cauterizations, from the cure of the head within the feet, so that it may please you; and from what you seek, and by which you needed to be treated.
Chapter one.
Of the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
Do you know that this illness can be seen in children from birth, and when the newborn child has his head lifted up.
And some are hidden due to a hidden cause which is not known.
I have only seen this disease in children; and in all those whom I saw it appeared as if they were going to die, and so did it seem to me a useless work in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head always remained swollen until he could not bear it on account of the great size of his head, and more because the moisture increased within him so as to cause death.
And this moisture, or is added between the cheek and the jaw, or is added below the jaw over the chin.
If the operation is done in such a way that the moisture is between the cheek and the jaw, and the swelling is little, then you should cut a hole in the middle of the head, and if the length of the hole is two fingers within, it will allow the moisture to run, and this is the form of the sponge.
And if the moisture is increased, and the swelling is greater, then there are two holes according to this way of doing it:
And if the moisture is below the jaw, it is a sign that you should open the opening of the head completely, and squeeze out the water when you compress it from within; and do not let it be hidden from you. Then you should cut in the middle of the head, according to this way of doing it, with three holes:
And then let the whole moisture out; and then strengthen the holes with drapes and down; and then pour water from above on it, on the fifth day, and then wash the limbs and cure the pain with poultices and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture so that the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another way of incision which you consider according to the size of the swelling and the collection of water; because some are greater in the back, or at the front, or on the right hand side, or on the left; so then deal with the incision where the swelling appears and the water collects, and pour out according to what is possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, and allow the blood to flow away from the body, because this flow of blood can cause death for the patient from the escape of blood due to injury.
Chapter two.
When there is a wound in the lungs or in the feet, and it is very old, and do not apply medicine to it; then the last cure is done by incision of those two arteries.
And then when you want to cut the head of the patient, and rub the area with rough cloth that it appears the veins, and strongly secure the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is; and the places which are near to those in front of the ears are pricked, and covered except in a few men.
And then look at the vein, and try to cut each one with a sponge, entering it into the bone through the hole made by the incision, and do so according to the length of the head.
And if you want to, introduce the sponge below the artery, and cut it with incision at the opening towards the back.
And the length of the incision is divided into two parts; because when any vein is cut with a pulsating pulse, it will break out from the incision very soon, and that will cause pain frequently.
Maybe if the vein does not appear on feeling, then you should measure the quantity of the space from three fingers; and then look at it with an attempt, and cut into the bone.
And here is the quantity of a palm. and it is firm in the grasp of him who grasps it most often, and all of this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the swelling of the vein.
And then look at the disease; and if there is a cause of the swelling in the jaw, you should cut it according to what is necessary, and do not let it cause swelling.
And then strengthen the disease with down and linen cloth; and then cure it with poultices until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
Of the extraction of veins which are in the temples.
When there is a movement of the brain or a catarrh due to alcoholic drinks and due to quality in the membranes of the temples, or it appears violent and similar to those, and it is treated with medicine, and you do not confer with it; then we are concerned with these diseases by extracting the veins from the temples, and cauterizing those as shown above.
And the way of operation and extraction of these is that the patient rubs the skin where the vein appears, because it is shown by his pulse, and it is hidden except in a few men due to its speed.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient be strongly secured with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the vein appears visibly to you. Then you take the sponge in this way: And then you should cut the cheek with ease until you reach the vein; and then you take it from one side, and extract it at its ends, until you discover the vein of the tunic which is left behind, completely.
Maybe if the artery is thin, you should wrap it with a thread at its end, and then cut it from one side according to the length of the limbs on both sides, and do not allow blood to flow because if it is not cut, the blood will not flow.
And then empty the blood from a palm. Inside three.
If the vein is large, then you should secure it with two strong threads of cotton or string, and do not let it be broken before the consolidation of the disease, and allow blood to flow from it.
And then you should cut the surplus that is between two ligaments; and make it in that hour or at another time.
And if you want to, cauterize it with fire within the bone at the end of the limb, and do so in the place where the vein was cut, and keep that place as it is.
And the best work is that of the patient having fever or being in a hot state; because cauterization is of those causes that help to dry up the moisture, and so on.
And then extract the veins that rub the place where the cut is made, and make them rest on a fine powder of salt gently, and then cure it with dry medicines by making the flesh and the blood dry within, so that it may be healed.
If, while you are opening another vein which is causing blood to flow from the artery, then you should stop it from flowing by cauterizing or pressing it, and strengthen your hand within so that it does not flow with blood. And if for some reason that is not present here, then pause the small child on the spot before it is glistened, and place the spot with very cold water of intense coldness until the acute pain stops, and is strengthened as much as possible.
And the water that is put out with an iron bar is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, because you have sent the two places with this cautery, and pause each one, lighting it up, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that the water can be drawn between the extremities of him, for they are not consolidated altogether from this cautery.
And this is the form of the cauterizer:
And the acute edge of the two blades is. However, if there are smaller edges than two blades, because if they are sharp with only two blades, and do not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, in those where there is some thickness, the fire's heat must be kept on it, and the flesh is gently separated.
And this work is better than all works and lighter.
And the space between the two blades is the quantity of the thickness of it.
It will take four.
Of the treatment for acute and acidic wounds of the feet.
When the acidic tears are and those veins that pass over the top of the head do not respond to any treatment of medicine, and often the face of the patient becomes red and it feels as if it is burning with ants, and the feet of him become exhausted, dampening their skin so much that they become rough, and the eyelids are scraped by the acute edge of the tears, and these tears are not suitable for this operation, and they do not respond to treatment with spitting.
And it is that you order the servant to quickly shave the hair from the forehead, and make three cuts in the forehead evenly spaced according to its length. And if the length of the cut falls two times: the first cut is evenly spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second cut is according to the length a small distance from the movement of the eyelids that are in the tear, and the third cut is on the other side.
And keep away from the beginning of the arteries that are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each cut is a third of a yard long.
And if you have a sponge-like stick or dry cloth that dries the wound quickly.
Then put the stick of two sharp extremities, and this is the form of the cut: that it starts from the temple and continues to the second cut. Examine the whole bone that is between two cuts, which is over the bone itself, and then make a small cut in the middle of it until it reaches the second cut. Then strike the stick and enter into the first cut another time, or an instrument is called a scalpel, taken from one side and not sharp on the other side.
And pause the jaw of him from above the bone, and the bar from below it, and make a small cut in the middle, and separate all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
However, if the cut continues from the bone and makes a small cut in the middle of it, then make another cut in the middle of it until it reaches the other cut.
And because it runs from the bone with a certain quantity of blood, squeeze the places of the feet of the dry wound.
Then pause in each cut a small piece of cloth, and pause over them dirty rags that are wet and greasy, and wipe that does not cause a poultice with blood.
And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of cold water, and then treat it with oil and rosewater and other things until the scabs are healed.
It will take four days.
Of the treatment for acute and chronic wounds that descend from the temples inside the head.
When blood comes out with pain and continues to flow, often the feet of the patient become very tired, their eyelids are swollen and scarred, and because of the severe pain in the scalp, and the loss of hair is common, and because the eyes have a cloudy appearance, these wounds are not suitable for treatment with water alone, or for treatment with oil and other things.
And the best treatment for these wounds is this: that you order the servant to shave the forehead, and make a cut in the middle place of the forehead, a small distance from the edge of the eyelids, and it should be on the bone; and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws, until it reaches the exposed bone.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill the gap between the two lips of the wound with a small piece of cloth or a patch of linen. Then wipe away any dirty rags that are wet with oil and vinegar, so that it does not cause a poultice with blood.
And when the wound has healed and the pus has decreased, then you will take flour from two pieces of wheat and four pieces of colophony and mix it together, and make a paste out of it, and administer it to these wounds in the form of an ointment made from native ingredients.
It will take six days.
Of the treatment for blood that comes out in the ears.
All causes that come out in the ears are of four kinds, because either it is mineral stone or similar to it, because of iron and lead, or it is plant-like, because of cedar or favar, or it is fluid-like, because of water and vinegar and similar things, or some animal.
And when mineral stone comes out in the ear or a similar cause to those causes that are not true, then pause the ear on the shoulder, and if the stone is moved, then distil it with olive oil or vinegar, and then administer the infusion of it, and make him sneeze at the time of application, and wipe his nose with a cloth. Then pause the circuit of the ear with some cloth or wool, and stretch out the ear because it is bruised in these causes.
And if it is not bruised, then administer the infusion with the instrument called an epiceratic needle, whose form is this:
And if it is bruised with the needle, then it is good; otherwise, administer the infusion with a quarter of a teaspoon of doubled oil.
And if it is not bruised with water, then make a tube of metal and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and cover its opening with wax and softened oil so that it is not too much but only as much as necessary for the tube to stay in place. Then remove it with a strong grip, because three times have been counted with water that has been described.
However, if it is not bruised in this way, then take a silver ring or an old ring, and place a small quantity of the cloth between the teeth, and pause it on the side of the ear with a mild grip; then make a small cut at the end of the ring with a sharp blade. And approach this to the ear with ease, and dry the ear from moisture.
And so if it is not caused by a furunculous infection due to all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should cut off the part that would cause an abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut that out is that you should first mark the vein with a blade and extrude it out second by the method of virtue, and then approach your knife between your hands and separate the ear from its base, and make a small incision in the root of the ear which should be greased with oil in the area to be pricked gently. And the incision should be in the shape of the moon so that it reaches the ear-drum, and if the ear-drum is burst, stop it with an appropriate instrument; then sew up the incision quickly and heal that inside so that it may be cured.
And if the cause is a fluid that builds up and inflates the ear, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not comply with his advice and insist on your own, then you should take a thin thread according to this form: and administer the extraction of that fluid which is stuck in the ear.
And do not pour water when you think that the ear is already moist with vapor from the ear, and place it in a bowl of water, and extract it gently or cut it off as we have said before, for it is convenient to extract it in this way.
But in water that is entered into the ear, it should be that the patient uses a sneeze at the beginning, and fill his own ear with a little old wine, and beat over that ear by which water comes out, and if it is caused by a furunculous infection, then it is good; and if not, then take two very small peasy peas according to its length, and tie them together, and the patient should put one of them into his ear and jump over it with the other one on that part from which water comes out. So do not stop pouring water until all the water has been discharged.
So do not stop pouring water until all the water has been discharged. And when the water is completely discharged, then you should take paper or a piece of cloth  . i . , and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it burns completely.
And then take another piece of cloth and pour water repeatedly until all the water is discharged, and insert it with a cannula as we have said before as an ear-drummer.
But in the extraction of beasts that enter into that ear, if it is a small thing, then push and pull gently as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes pain to the head of the person, then administer extraction with a sharp object and a cut, and the cause of it is lighter than all the other causes that are caused by the ear.
But in the extraction of a vermen that is generated in the ear, when you administer to it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillation, and if you do not comply with your treatment, then you should keep the ear to the sun.
And if there is any cause of worms here, then extract it with a sharp object or a sharp tool, but if there is no cause, then take a narrow cannula that is curved and wide at the end from which it comes out: And introduce the narrow end into the ear according to its quantity because it suffers from that malady; and draw it out with a strong suction, and pour water repeatedly, so that all the worms are discharged.
But if you do not comply with my advice to go out, then you should try to close the canal with wax as we have said before; and then administer distillation as has been described for the cure of worms, and see water in the treatment of distillation.
And may your effusion be with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form of it: And make it of silver or brass, wide at the end, in the shape of a small tube, and smooth it on the top.
Then, if you want to put it into the concave part of the cannula from which you pour liquid medicine, then do so. And if you want, take the wire and wrap it around the end of the cannula gently, and pour oil or juice from any herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the cannula - which is in the ear -, and then insert the wire with a little pressure onto it, and squeeze your hand slightly to force the oil out into the concave part of the ear, and let the patient feel the oil inside;
And water that is already poured into the ear is also burned slightly by the fire. And keep in mind that the cause which you will distillate in the ear should not be too dry, because ear medicines do not tolerate such water.
Chapter VII.
Of the Treatment of Ear Aches.
Some small children are born with an obstruction in their ears, which does not perforate them; and water already exists in some adults, causing pain in the middle part of the ear, and in some cases, it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the middle part of the ear, which does not comprehend the head, is in difficult cases of treatment.
And in that which you are able to feel the head, then keep the ear of the patient to the sun and look at it. And if there is any obstruction apparent, open that with a sharp object which has a slightly curved end:
If the end of it is small in length, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the blade is two little blunt to avoid injury to the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to hidden meat in the ear or in the middle part of it, then cut it out with a sharp object and do so with great care that all the meat be removed.
And if the obstruction is in the middle part of the ear, then take a thin wire and burn it slightly with fire, and place that in the middle part of the ear.
And if you have perceived any obstruction by water which the patient perceives with ease, then try to press it gently; and keep in mind that you do not injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place a thin piece of lead in the ear according to the size of the tube which you have wrapped in wax with olive oil; and do so for several days until it is certain that the ache has been cured; or take some fresh lead and wrap it in cerot that is made of rosin, and place it on the affected part, and let it cool; and then cure that inside so that it may be healed.
May it be that the blood flows out, then dip the sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter .viii.
Of the cure for blindness, which is given by applying to the eyelids.
The athesil that should be applied to the eyelids of the patient has two kinds, some are wet and some dry.
Therefore, if you have such herbs as marjoram or mint, and chop them up, then apply them to the affected areas, and place a bandage over them, folded three times.
May it be that pain comes from a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those with the subtle causticum.
And the best cauterization is to return the incisions and bandages when there remains no cause of their rash; and when they are burned with fire, those rashes are scorched and do not return.
Chapter .ix.
Cure for blindness that comes upon the eyelids of the patient.
The spots on the eyelids of the patient are caused by some cause that is gathered together in strength and hardness, and thus it increases and is called "glaucous."
And this is accumulation of thick moisture on the lower and upper eyelids.
Therefore, the operation is that you should consider if the increase is caused by water on the eyelid and it spreads all over; and the cause of it is clear.
Therefore, cut open that with a blade from the edge, and remove it easily with care; and suspend that of mint and cut off that.
And if the shape is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and treat that so that it may be healed.
And if it is little, then it will not harm those for whom that blood of it restores it and heals it.
And if the increase is declining towards the inner part of the eyelid, then remove that from the inside and suspend it with mint, apart from any incision; and press it with your hand so that it does not spread.
Then cut open the patient's eye, wash the eyelid with saltwater; and treat the area with a caustic solution so that it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of the cauterization on the upper eyelid of the patient.
It is the one that is produced in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and it especially affects children, causing them to cry due to their eyes crying; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of the tears.
And so you can see each other's faces all the time, and they sleep with their eyebrows wet; and the following signs appear in them: when you press the area, you feel a burning sensation within them; and when you touch the area of the lid with your finger, you feel the pulse there.
And there is no way of operation except to place the patient' head on the table and to place a cloth over it and cut a small circle according to the quantity of arznei that contains in all parts, and to place that over the area and press it with your finger so that it is burned within the middle of the circle; and then close it in the middle of the moisture with a knife, cutting along the edge to prevent the moisture from spreading, and do not let it spread.
May it be that in the preon you cut all the way down so that you can reach the arznei, for in certain places you carry out arznei by incision according to the shape of the white stain.
Therefore, remove it with the cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers and turn it between your right and left hand so that it is destroyed.
And take care that you do not put your finger in the incision so that the moisture does not reach the eye and damage it.
May it be that you do not put your finger in the incision at the beginning, but rather put it in the incision a small way so that it treats; and then remove it as we have said; and then pour water over it and rub it with sand.
And therefore they should make salt and put it in the concave part of the incision so that the moisture that is left from it is removed.
Then treat that so that it is healed.
May it be that in the area there is a swelling of heat, then treat that with plasters of cold poultice so that it is healed.
Chapter 11.
Of ways of touching the patient' pulse.
When the eyelids of the patient are swollen and their natural hair is gone, then touch them with cold poultice and let the tears flow and the eyelids be moistened, so that the cause of damage to the eye, which is called touching the eye, may appear; and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or it is performed by cutting and sewing them together; or with reeds according to whether they are open or closed.
And therefore, when you place the patient' head on your left hand, then turn the eyelid of the eye toward your thumb; if it turns, it is good; and if not, pierce that with a needle where it should be turned, and make the needle go through that, — close to the edge of the eyelid where hair does not grow, — close to the hair, and pull the thread over the edge with your thumb toward the eye, and turn that.
Then cut open the inner part of the eyelid with a blade and place a small piece of cloth or cloth over it, and draw out the thread over the edge with your thumb so that it does not rub against the eye; then remove the thread and turn that.
However, if it is the case that it is due to a great amount of moisture on the eyelid, for that has become very soft in men; for in men who have this problem, the amount of moisture that is present on the eyelid causes it to be soft and increase in size.
Then cut open the area between the two lines that you have drawn, and start from the eye of tears within to the eye of the nose. And if your incision is close to the natural hair, as it is with the thick-haired man.
Then place the onion in one of the two angles of the cloth, and remove it completely, and adjust the two lips with a thin thread or yarn, and wipe the blood, and make the blood stick to the hair; and if you want to make it stick, then do not; and do not.
Then leave the sutures of the threads within for three or four days, and then treat that.
And if you want to leave the wound unsewn, and heal what there is that dries and constricts, for the eyelid is lifted by the sealing of the wound and its enlargement; but a better sewed wound I have not spoken of yet - and so I said then about the ancient art of taxanir.
But even if it is necessary to apply pressure on the patient's back, this is a good operation and not something to be feared.
And there is another way of doing this with taxanir; and it is to lay a thin blade on the eyelid, and to raise the eyelid by three small holes separated and gathered together according to this form:
But if this is not possible, take a needle with thread in it, and insert that into the middle of the figure, and between the other thread and the major tear, and the thread next to it; then adjust these threads to be equal, and then raise them all together, so that the entire figure hangs over the edge on which it is drawn, as if with a raised bridge.
Then adjust the two eyelids to be sewn together, and heal whatever is inside that needs to be healed.
But if you have a blister, you should sew it shut, or cut it open and pour on the ointment, and cover it with something wet.
And some people also make their eyelids turn inwards, so that you should not use the incisions we have spoken of; but a sewed eyelid is more artificial.
Taxanir on the nose is according to this form: and it is to turn the eyelid and divide the figure that is inside according to what I have said; then, with art, make two thin blades or two small stakes whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of the nose. Then you have already cut into the ends of any splits, where you have the threads.
Then add a little of the ointment to each of the ends that are too long on the eyelid, and tighten the blades or stakes that you have cut with a firm grip, and leave them there for some time; for by this means the thread will die and rot away, and not remain stuck to it.
But if it is late, then cut the thread that binds the eyelids together, and heal the wound within that needs to be healed.
And when it is set in order, the eyelid is raised and does not prick.
And this is the way to make two thin blades according to this form: and have the quantity of its length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the raising of pricking hairs on the nose with a needle.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and sharp on the nose, then do the operation in this way: take a very thin blade, and pause it on the fiber of a very fine silk thread, and then adjust the ends of it so that they do not touch each other, and cut them with a very slight motion. And let the length of the threads be according to a palm's width.
Then you may take another thin blade and place it in a V-shape, and cut the ends of those threads that you have just made, if you wish.
Then return the patient' head to its original position on the table, and place it near the sun so that your work is visible, for it is a subtle and small operation.
Then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires it to bend, and let it enter quickly into the eyelid so that it comes out at the other side of the hair.
Then pull the hair out from under it and insert it into the oil, and let there be one or two or three hairs, but not more.
Then take your hand away from that place where the hair has come out of its root into the oil on the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the hair is pulled out of its oil and does not come out with it, then you will pull out the oil from the ends that have split and are held by the thread that you have tied, within which the oil will come out.
Then let the oil remain in place on the nose, for you have pulled out its oil and each hair; then leave them for two or three days, within which time the hairs will come off their places and grow on top of it.
And if the hair is too long, then adjust one of the natural hairs, and raise it up to that; or, if you want to lengthen it, then leave it there for a while, and then raise it up.
Chapter XIII.
On the curing of an inflammation that occurs in the eyelid above.
When an inflammation occurs in the nose, and it is contracted in its skin, or to the right or left side by a poor consolidation of the wound or by sectioning or cauterizing, and it is called leporine, and this either arises from natural causes or from accidental means; and it is caused by a bad consolidation of the wound or by sectioning or cauterizing, or by similar means, it is called leporine.
Then the way to perform the operation is that you cut that consolidation and separate the eyelids, and pause them in it so that there is a little cloth between them; then bind them together within which they are healed.
And I do not know that you should use cauterization on the nose from any causes that cause it to dry out; for if you do so, it will return to being inflamed more than if you do not use it.
Use on the nose from causes that soften it with fenugrec, and immerse in water which is warm and salty; or with a liquid called dヤquilon, which is made from some oils, and dip it in that water; then heal it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all that is possible to avoid consolidation according to the form in which it begins.
And this operation that we have spoken of is nothing more than a correction of inflammation that does not return to its original form according to what it begins.
Chapter XIV.
On the curing of an inflammation in the eyelid below.
This inflammation that is caused in the lower eyelid is called, when it occurs naturally, by a natural cause, or by an accidental means.
Or it may be caused accidentally by an inflammation, or by a sectioning, or a cauterizing, or by similar causes.
And the way to perform the operation is that you take a very fine blade with double threads, and place it in the flesh, and make the thread run under the eyelid, so that it passes from the tear duct on the left side into that of the right; then let the thread come out at the ends of the eyelid.
Then stretch the flesh with the threads attached to it, and cut it with the blade, and sew it to the wide part of the nose with thread. And if the figure returns to its original position, it is good; but if not, then take a needle and insert it into the split figure, and turn the eyelids around, and sew up the two slits in the middle of the eyelid.
Then adjust the ends of the two slits from different angles of the incision, so that they meet; and then make the figure of the two slits meet with each other.
And this figure is a Greek letter: alpha.
And place that flesh there according to the amount it is the width of his hand away from him, that he saws the eyelid.
And put those parts apart and stitch them with a woolen thread; and also treat those that have said of the soothing medicines and of the water within which it is healed.
And if they are cured with an incision or a stitch or cauterization, then you should know that you make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid according to what has preceded it. And separate those two lips according to what they have said.
In the summary of the speech of the cure of alxacrati when it is dry or left alone, let that operation run in him, according to what it is prepared in the form of alxacrati, and that one is in a shape of dots.
And the artisans who know it prepare it in any way possible so that it returns to its natural shape or close to it, and this patient according to what is suitable for him by operation and instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in some men that it is solid to the membrane of the eye above, and is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, then you should know that you enter the edge of the eyelid away from it, and raise up that or stretch it with a wax.
And you should incise the adhesion with a subtle blade, which is not sharp to the incisors, keeping obtuse so that the patient does not disturb during the operation, and leave the blade that does not hurt the eye in its acuity.
And may your incision that it removes this adhesion with ease within so that the eyelid is returned according to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
And you should place in the eye salt water which you wash with; or distill in it of Zunic, dissolving in water.
And separate between the eyelid and the eye with a calve of him, and place on the eye wool infused with membrane of wine, and immediately third day uses of causes of consolidation within that it is healed.
Chapter 16.
Of incision of the eye and of the eminence of flesh of the lacrimal.
You should know that the eye is according to two ways, either it is nervous and seems like a hard cyphers subtle; or it is not nervous, resembling white frozen water, which when it is touched, it takes with an onion, and is cut off, and the onion does not stick to it.
And both spices do not begin unless from the lacrimal major within that it goes little by little so that it covers the view and prohibits the light and movement of the eye.
May the way of acting in the incision is that the patient keeps his head down on his chest, and immediately opens his eyelids, and raises the eyelid to your hand, and collects the eye with an onion of few duplicates, and stretches it from above. And pick up an eyehook and put it in the eye of a horse or cow or water, or of any other things, or duplicate the end of the hook little by little and keep that in the middle of the eye with its edge, and push it into the eye with the hook, and cut it through the edge of the eye; and stretch it from above, and duplicate the end of the hook little by little and keeps that in the middle of the eye with its edge, and push it into the eye with the hook, and cut it. And so you continue to stretch it with the edge within the back of it.
And you should incise the edge of the eye with a subtle blade or with small scissors, and leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal so that by incision of it does not produce continuous flow of tears.
And some times the eye is extended with salt water or with faith, as has been said, and immediately it is removed with a lion's blade, of which shape this is.
And you should guard that with the blade you do not touch the corneal membrane and that it runs through its rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
And immediately after incision pour a little salt water in the eye and leave that within another day; and also treat that with water that it is healed.
And if the eye is not nervous and you cannot put in it the needle, nor does it stick to it, then know that this special kind of eye is healed with medicines, and is healed thus with a view and recommendation in division.
And if you want to incise that, then open the patient' eye and pick up a subtle lion's blade of acute shape according to this form: with subtlety. And if that is rarefied and is confined and taken in the edge of the eye, then distill from it in the eye with faith or salt water, and leave the eye within another day.
And immediately repeat the operation within that it is healed all of him that it is his, but that is the opposite, because you should leave that and cure at the beginning of the wound within that it is healed.
And immediately repeat your operation on that eye with reason so that it is healed.
The eminence of the lacrimal, if it is not seen in the eye as great harm, should be suspended with an onion; and incise that from one edge, and do not finish the incision unless the flow of tears stops.
And immediately distill in the lacrimal faith or salt water within that it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of incision of algazardenic and of water which is born from meat that it is joined to the eye.
Some times in the eyelids of animals is born rosy meat, and it is placed within that it covers the pupil, or moves closer or further from the eyebrows and presses them together at the sides, and is joined to the rosy flesh of the pilar.
May the operation in him be that the patient keeps his head down on his chest, and immediately opens his eyelids, and collects all that meat with a hook convenient to water, and then water with a forceps or a basket; and immediately incise the meat at the beginning within that it is finished by the incisors, and guard that of the eye which does not hurt that.
And may your incision be the one that incises those or the blade that we have recommended in the incision of the eye with the hook, or with small scissors according to what comes next the form of it is appropriate to this chapter.
And then when your incision is completed and all that meat is healed, then fill the eye with salt water, or distill in it powdered rosy medicine, and place it over the eye with a membrane of wine within that it is assured from the pustule.
And if there is any cause of algardenic and it is broken by a cut, and you fear a pustule, then leave the eye and cure that pustule with water, and immediately repeat the operation within that it is healed, and simulate in the meat that it occurs in the eye of this kind.
However, you should know that any cure of the eye from the eye of frew through natural or accidental ways by fire, and do not put your hand in any of these operations within that you see that this member is suffering that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the collection of sap from the wound.
Sap should be collected from the wound, which is kept dry and clean, and the wound allowed to heal over a period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which sap is drawn is strong and not another illness besides sap, then you will collect that sap.
And if you command the patient to raise his head to the side, and suspend those veins with one or two threads according to your prudence; and that one thread should be of a fine double thread according to this form:
or two threads of varying thickness according to this form:
Then those veins should be collected with fine thread, and the thread should be changed every hour, so that the veins do not stick to the wound and become loose.
And be careful not to cut the wound at the edges of the spatula; and if your work is in front of the sun, and stand firm in your work so that you do not cut anything else besides those veins.
When you are finished, then you will distill in the wound clear water or salt water to wash away what has been collected there, so that it is not infected with any disease.
If you cannot collect enough water in that hour, and then you will apply something to relieve the pain of the wound, and let it rest for a few days until the pain is relieved and the swelling has subsided due to the swelling.
Then repeat the above process according to the following method within which it will be cured.
This is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
Of reducing swelling to the nose.
When you treat swelling with cauterization or acute medicine according to the sequence of events, and it is not cured, then do not remove the swelling, but rather cut off the maturity of it, and extract all the moisture that is in it, leaving the bone uncovered.
And if the bone is exposed and rotten or black in it, then you will cut it with a tool whose form is as follows:
It is called a sharp cap, and it is made of hard iron, and the cap is round so that it can be pierced with a point of lime or sharpened with a fine point (so it can be pierced with a point).
Then place that above the place where the bone is corrupted, and move it back and forth between the toes, pressing your hand little by little until you feel that the corruption is smooth.
Then water should be applied to it a few times, and then restore the place with healing and drying agents.
If the place is consolidated and good meat covers it well, and the wound is closed by the skin after 10 days, and there is no swelling or bleeding, then you will know that it is cured.
And if not, then do not leave it as it is, but rather reduce the breach to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and if you cut through the second bone with iron or acute medicine, and after that expose the bone, then you will use the following method:
The length of the iron triangle, and the fist of it should end in a point at the edge, and so often as possible.
Then place that above the bone, and keep it from the lacrimal; and place your hand a little on the edge of the wound, and press your hand little by little around the edge until you feel the patient's pulse beating strong and steady through the whole bone, and the patient should not feel any pain as you move your hand.
Then restore the place with healing and drying medicines applied to it, so that it does not swell up again.
If the meat at the wound does not endure, then the matter that flows into the joints returns to the nose, and water should be applied to it again, but less than before.
Chapter XX.
Of reducing a swelling on the spine.
When the spine protrudes in its entirety and does not hurt or decrease, then you should loosen the binding, and then tie it tightly, and then apply oil to it that is made from acacia and olive and turpentine, and then place a plaster over the spine that is made of felt.
And the way to make powder for this is that you take sheets of linen cloth, and each sheet should be double in width, and then cut it into four pieces; and make these pieces from this cloth.
Then place those powders one on top of the other according to the quantity that is needed for the spine. Then tighten those powders on top of each other with a strong and tight binding, and then apply the oil for healing to it; and then remove the bindings, and let the spine rest in its position throughout the day, and at night cover it with felt.
If meanwhile the binding becomes soft, then you should make it tight again.
Then remove the binding at night, and cover it with felt.
And if the spine has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powder and the binding and the vents until it is cured.
Chapter XXI.
Of cutting out a swelling on the eyelids.
When there is swelling on the eyelids, and then it becomes large and protrudes, then cut out the eyelids according to this method: if you can reach the edge of the eyelid with a thread, use that thread to mark the edge of the swelling; then place a double thread from the lacrimal edge, and pierce that with a needle, and let it pass through the swelling and secure it on the other side; and then cut out the swelling with that same thread, and tighten it.
Then remove the needle and place it on top of the wool infused with milk of magpie, and leave it for a while before cutting it off; and then make sure that the thread does not cut through the eyelid but stops at the edge of the swelling.
Then heal the patient with water, which comforts them when their disease is cured.
In some cases of swelling on the eyelids, a circle of cloth is tied around the whole eyelid, and then it is pierced with a fine needle that comes from the edge of the eyelid, and the watery secretions are drawn out, and the eyelid is lowered and tightened up.
Then tighten it up so that it does not hurt.
Chapter XXII.
Of the treatment of eye diseases.
This disease, which is called "alconata", is not anything other than a sickness that is adjusted to the spine like descending water, and it is not that way.
The way to treat it is that you put the eye patch on the bed and turn it over, and then take your two fingers and press them together firmly against each corner of the eye, and then tie them so that they do not move apart; and then place a piece of cloth over the eye and tighten it, and remove the patch for a short time during the day, and at night cover both eyes with felt.
And if it does not go down to the bottom, you will know that it is water.
If it is not ready for the eye to go down with water that we have mentioned, then tie the patch over the eye tightly, and then take a fine needle and pierce it through the conjunctiva of the cornea into the edge of the eyelid (just above the spot where the eyelid meets the skin), so that the disease is removed from it.
Then, when it is finished, you will distill the herbal water that you have prepared in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already built fenugrec and honey.
And then treat other causes until it is healed.
Chapter .xxii.
On the treatment of water coming from the liver.
You have already said about the waters in division and what serves to pierce through speech announcing, then according to health.
Then, tell them that you should pour the water between your legs over a pan and place the liver in it, then strain it.
And place your left hand near the eyelid of the liver and if the water is in the left liver then place your right hand, or if it is on the right.
And with your right hand take the almighty, if the liver is left, or with your left hand, if the liver is right.
And place the tip of the almighty near the crown because of the thickness of the fat on the liver from the lower eyelid, and then pour out the almighty with good will and your right hand.
Then pierce into the liver and feel that the almighty has already reached the cause seen.
And that the measure of the way of the almighty to the eye is the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the liver; for you will see at that pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal layer.
Then pour out the almighty into the place in which there is water, and then throw another bucket of water over it, so that if the water descends quickly, then take the water from a vessel, and then put the liver in its cavity.
Then pause a little bit; if the water descends quickly, then take another break before pouring out the almighty.
And then, when it is dried up and does not descend, take the almighty with ease, and roll it a little at a time with your right hand, and then dissolve in water a little clear salt from gems and mix it with the liver; and then pause outside the liver, or stop or wash the liver with rose oil and album of lamb and dip the liver into its cavity.
Perhaps these are not from our times but they rest over that liver trisseled with lamb's fat.
And if you don't obey your almighty to the instrument of the liver because it is hard, for this is of some men that the liver is hard, then when you take the almagy into its cavity because of its hardness – for from this the form is taken:
And then pierce out at that connection, and don't finish your right hand in the trap, and don't stop unless you pour out water for the almighty.
Then bring out the almighty according to what I have said.
Then prepare the liver's work, that it may be prepared to lie down in the dark house, and it is forbidden from all movement.
Then pause on the nature of the water so that its nature may be soft, and don' t touch the patient' s head to the left or right.
And make an incision according to its disposition in the third day.
Then lead them out of that dark house and examine their eyes, and then bring back the incision by the seventh day.
And don' t pour water in the time of treatment, or a little after infusion. While you keep water apart because it sweats from the liver strongly and with great effort.
Perhaps this may happen, then take the liver out on the seventh day, and then adjust it with water to stop the fever.
Then wash the patient's eyes and pause over their facial orifice to which it may be directed the sweating from within by keeping it apart for several days, existing in the dark house.
Then bring out of that dark house with grace and talk about its causes.
You know that in alchemy it is not excused from the discipleship of vision to some visions, and then you are sharp about the operation.
It has already reached us from some of those whom the Arts have touched, and some say that it brings fire to the alchemical water by piercing with it.
However, there is no sight of the one that has brought perfect water, nor water that has been drunk by some of the antediluvials; and it may be that this is new.
And these are the forms of alchemical water to which attention should be paid, because from those who do not know:
They are made of iron properly speaking, and they are the ends of its sharp triangle here, this subtlety being divided into three parts, so that:
Chapter.xxiv.
On the treatment of nosebleeds in the nose.
When the blood of various meats is mixed together and it is a cause that is gathered by the motus of the feet or to pollen; then this badness is called pollen because it seems like those of the foot represented. And from that is the cancerous meat, a Lapus, with a white color; and from that is the lion's meat not of a brown color.
So then in that which is of the lion's meat not fraudulent or cancerous, take the liver between your legs and place it under the sun, and pluck the liver' eyes out, and cut them into pieces in those meats. Then pull it apart from the middle parts, and then cut out water that you have understood from those with a sharp tool within which is impossible to remain; if for some reason it falls, take the water with ease within one of the subtle tools within which you understand that all the meat has already been eaten. If it falls for some reason, then take the water with care within one of the subtle tools within which you understand that all the meat has already been eaten. Perhaps this may happen, then take the water apart which you have kept; or from the malignant fevers, then cut out and cauterize that within which is impossible to remain, and all the holes are filled in.
Then bring it into the nose with ease near the incision of the sharp edge and water or blood. Perhaps the nose is wet, and if you bring out moisture into the palate, then you understand that it is healed.
Perhaps the moisture does not penetrate further, then you understand that inside the nose is meat in the upper parts of the bones; because it has not been cut away.
Then lead out the faithful within that is not coarse, and taste it with the tongue; and between each nut, pause to measure the amount of what you taste, and bring out the liver part into the nose with a sharp edge or with another cause which is possible to remain.
And if water has reached its end form, so that it throws out the odor of the liver within which it reaches the nostrils, and is hung on the golden chain, for ten children like this are attracted by the smell to those who want to do it; then it is a reason for that which you want to do.
Then pause the two ends of the faithful one, one end which comes out over the nose and the other which hangs down in the nose, and then bring out the lock of meat with the nuts that are within the faithful; and make water inside, and you understand that the meat has already reached the nuts of the faithful.
And then take out the kidney, and pause it in the hand of the surgeon with the abduction of the SANC one leg, and make it for three days or more until the poison runs all over that which is rotten from the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, pause in the hand a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
Or if you find that it is not cured, then use this one.
This is the form of the making-clean instrument with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
Make it of silver or of brass, which is like a small lantern opened up, so also with a little cavity, and meat-like.
And if you wish, make a tube closed up also with a cane, and the tube of the making-clean instrument is flat, open; and which has a handle in the back of it, having which hold that when you blow on it or pour oil or water that you wish from the secrets and causing diseases.
Chapter .XXV.
Of these nails put at the extremities of the nose.
Moles which are nailed at the extremities of the nose, and are made great and swollen in several days until the mole is seen.
And by water which you pour on that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and inherit all that. Then place over the area a fire or a burning medicine which is in the patient' place.
Or if the patient' wound is delayed until it is swollen, then consider if it is hard, of dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that which is nailed to him by fire because of the great evil over him on that part of the patient who had it.
And if the pustule is of a lion's touch and not of a dark color, and sometimes it is possible to scratch it entirely in all that, then evacuate the patient' disease and scratch that with fear, and heal the area with water which runs out and compresses within until it is healed.
Chapter  .XXVI.
Of the nose' surgery and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by simile.
Know that when this continuity happens in one of these cartilage, it gives little benefit to that operation unless in some men.
Therefore, if this happens because of some cause of those, that you consider if it is a fresh plague of the patient' mouth, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with sutures, and then heal that within until it is healed.
And if the lips of that solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is healed well, then consider if you remove each part of its knot apparently until it does not hurt any more. Then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and pour on those the dragon's powder and the triple salt, and pause over the dust a little plaster of Paris, or of some other of those cement powders, and leave that glued for two days or three, then remove that and replace that plaster and leave that within until it is healed.
The way of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as described in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread also.
Chapter .XXVII.
Of those causes which come out in the two lips inside.
Moles which are seen to some men in the insides of their lips like clumps of grass, and some of them are small and some are big.
Therefore, if you turn the lips and each part of those hardnesses of all, then pause the abruption filling up the place with triple salt until that plague is restrained, then wash that with honey and heal the area with water which is astringent, within until it is healed.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of the incising of the flesh fitted to the gums.
Great of small nails over the flesh fitted to the gums which the young ones attract white, then consider if you hang that with a string or if you have that with the hooks and incise that as far as the tooth, and leave that to run or the plague or the plague.
Then place over the area triple salt or any other astringent powder.
And if that flesh returns, then incise that secondarily, and cauterize that because cauterization does not return.
Chapter  .XXX.
Of teeth' causes to bite.
When on the surface of the teeth in the insides and in the fora between the gums are adjusted coarse roughness, leaves and some of those are black and they are formed yellow or green within until the gum is corroded by water, and the teeth that leave are coarse.
And then consider if you pass salt between your teeth and pause the top of it in the tooth, and rub those teeth which present those roughnesses and causes resembling sand within until they do not change color, and that does not return to the black and the yellow and the others before they are defined.
So if that water which is in those at the beginning of the cause is good; and otherwise, then consider if you repeat the cause over those every day and every other until it comes to the last statement in that which you wish.
Know that the teeth have need of various forms and of different figures according to how it is prepared for your operation. And for this reason that the rawness by which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the rawness by which it is cut between teeth according to other shapes, and those forms of rawness are always prepared, so you will see them soon enough:
Chapter   .XXX.
Of the extraction of teeth.
Consider if you heal the tooth of its pain completely and delay in the eradication of it entirely because there is no cause that replaces the lost substance of it when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance within which is an excuse in the eradication of it.
And then consider if the patient' tooth is forcibly extracted, firmly you must know that which pain does the patient' tooth cause, for moles have seen this water through an operation of the bars.
Then you must know that which is the painful tooth, and that you know well, then consider if you scarify in the path of the tooth with a needle which has no point, within until it is dissolved from the gum completely, and then cut that with tiny scissors or with sharp tweezers little by little until that disengages.
And he places a large towel in his strong hand to make a loud and strong noise, and puts the head of the patient between the thorns that are at the bottom so that they do not hurt me, and takes the tooth according to its right position so that it does not break or give more pain to the patient.
And if it is not a broken tooth, then take one of those instruments, and place that below all parts with ease and attempt the removal as if it were done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then cover that with a piece of cloth and stretch it with a delicate string so that it does not break in the hour of your contraction on that one; hold it like this.
And you open completely the incision in the circuit of all parts of the gum and keep your strength so that it does not break or tear that one, and return to the patient for the harm that is less than the first pain of it.
And you must not let water flow that these ignorant and audacious barbers do at the end and at the beginning of their cutting on it, for if they give water that we have recommended; because those who have seen bring about great men with difficult wounds, all their roots or some of them, or that you extract that one with some bones from the jaw also with water have testified.
And the eradication of it is washed with cold water or hot vinegar.
And if there is a flow of blood from it, as if there were little streams, then cut off some hair and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not stop, causticate it.
The shape of the forceps and delicate tweezers is more easily grabbed on the tooth at the beginning, with a short handle and thick grip, so that they are not twisted when you work with them.
And be like this, with times of a short handle, and when you start to work on those ones are not bent, are short extremities.
And they are made of iron from India, with right extremities and some of those extremities have teeth that others intrude in them and start by contraction and a strong grip, and some of the extremities of those ones are like the beak of a crow, which is sharp, and they are of a strong grip.
Chapter 31.
Of the eradication of teeth and the breaking of bones of the mandibles that are broken.
When you should eradicate the tooth that is broken for some reason, then return to the spot with mud for a day or two until the spot becomes soft; and if you see that the extremities are joined together like the beak of a crow or glove, the shape of the tweezers:
The extremities of them are made inside like this with lime or allium.
And if you do not obey your hand with these tweezers or tweezers, then return to the root and cut off all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name, so is a small pince, whose shape is this:
And be of a short handle, thick, and not bent so that it does not break.
Therefore, if the root is broken by water, it is good; and if not, help you with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular handle at the end of which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be of a triangular and short handle.
And you are helped by these instruments, having two handles, and this is the shape near the end: And other instruments will be needed in shaving teeth; for this is well made with this instrument that is like an oar, and this is the shape:
of the triangular handle that is bent or short, which has some thickness, and is not bent so that it does not break.
And you should know that the tools for teeth are like other tools.
The skilled and subtle craftsman in art, invents for himself according to his own will the operation and the various pains; because there are different pains from which the small did not speak or pause their own instrument, because of the shapes of different kinds.
If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth are broken, then it is carefully returned to its place with water that is convenient for them of the instruments and forceps we have talked about in the extraction of teeth roots, and help you with movements of which this is the shape:
And be in some little thickness to the other, and be stretched or tied up with the mouth so that it does not slip or run away while the bone is completely broken; and return the place with convenient medicines according to water.
But if there is a small break in the bone, then take that part of it and its blackness, and cure that within which has healed.
Chapter 32.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
When prominent teeth are not in line with the natural course of their peers, the shape is sharp, and especially when they are on women, and most when they are on elderly women; then return to the tooth that does not fit another tooth, and if it is not joined to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose shape is similar to a pig's tail, and which is made of iron from India with a sharp extremities.
And be your incision with which you cut that tooth in two days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not touch another tooth.
And if prominent tooth is broken with grating, then grind it with a grinding of iron from India, whose shape is this:
And be all of it iron from India and the point evenly; and be of a short handle with sharp points like needles, which shape the tooth is ground little by little in two days with ease, so that another tooth does not touch or cause pain. Then cut off that one at the end, and take it apart with small scissors.
And if it is a tooth whose one part is broken and held by the tongue, then return to the root that is exposed and bent, and smooth it so that the tongue does not catch or corrupt the word.
Chapter 33.
Of the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver wire.
When there is a fall or a blow to the teeth, and the mallet does not hit them, but you have treated them with stinging medicines, and your treatment has not helped, then return them to their place with gold wire, and not silver, because silver changes color quickly and does not last long; but gold never changes its color.
And be the wire in such subtility and thickness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the cut is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and if it grows too much between two broken ones, until it reaches the thread to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then return to the position in the middle of the broken part from which you started, and tighten your hand with ease and skill until it does not hurt.
And may your heart be as strong as the string on which the threads of the teeth are tied, so that it does not break.
Then with forceps or tweezers, cut off the excess ends of the thread, and place it in any place, and turn it and hide it between the healthy tooth and the rotten one, so that it does not harm the tongue. Then let that string be straight with a rope.
If it comes off or breaks, strengthen that one or those with another thread all the time.
This is the shape of teeth and the form of their correction of two healthy teeth and two rotten ones, thus bound:
And when a tooth or two come back to their place, and they are resown in that way with what has been sowing, and they remain in that condition.
And do not make this except with good hands and wise people.
And some teeth are broken by the bones of cows, and they are made in their form of teeth, and placed in place where a tooth fails, and strengthened in that way with what we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Chapter.XXXIV
On the incision of the ligature that runs in the language and prohibits licking.
This Ligature that leaves the tongue some times or is natural to the man who doesn't have it, or happens by accident and happens because of a plague that has already been consolidated.
And the operation on him is that you work on the mouth of the patient, the head existing in the sun; and raises his tongue, and cut off that nervous ligature according to its length so that the tongue does not stick to it.
If there is any hardness or denudation on it and that is standing because of the consolidation of a plague, then you cut off that one with oil and cut it according to its length so that the nodule is not cut off.
And keep that there is no crack in the bone and that you do not cut here arcing and allow blood to flow from a wound.
Then wash the traces of the incision with water or vinegar or with wet rags, and place the tongue away, and if it is a new wound that has just been cut, then let the patient leave his tongue out for a while so that it does not consolidate again.
If there is a flow of blood, place over the site vinegar dried up; if the blood flows from elsewhere, then cauterize the site with dry salt that is dissolved in water. Then treat it for other causes before it is cured.
Chapter.XXXV
On the extraction of a runnel from the tongue.
Some times there is a small lump on the tongue that resembles a wart and prevents the tongue from its normal operation; and it is hard to remove from inside so that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on him is that you work on the patient's mouth facing the sun and consider the lump.
And if it changes its color or becomes black, a hard one, that the patient does not lose his feeling, then do not touch that one because it is hard.
And if it is turned white, which is moisture, then you put oil on him, and cut that one with a thin blade, and cut it all up; and if blood flows in the hour of your operation, then place over his clothes dried up, so is vinegar, before it is cured.
Then return to your work before he is tired with care of him, and wash it with water and salt, and treat that one with the other treatment in water before it is cured.
Chapter.XXXVI
On the extraction of two warts and that which is nothing in the mouth and other warts.
When such warts are found in the mouth, then they are glandules that are put together, which are small and hard and have two warts, which when you treat them with oil that we have said in the division and they are not cured, then consider if the lump is hard, of white color, of little feeling, then do not touch that one with iron.
And if it is a roan color and the root is thick, then do not touch that one with iron because of the flow of blood; before taking it out, let it mature inside, and then cut it off or pull it out.
And if it is a white color, which is thin, then let that one be cut;
And the operation on him is that you consider before your operation if he has already recovered his warts by rest or has decreased with a decrease; and then put the oil on him facing the sun, and let his head be in the sun, and open his mouth, and serve themselves between their own hands away from the tongue of him, keeping it apart from this instrument that is made of noble material, and this is its shape:
It should be made of silver or gold, and should be thin with a blade.
Then you press it onto the tongue and show it to him the lump, and put oil on that one in the morning, let it rest for as long as you can. Another water that pulls off any cause of the tunics, and cut off that one with an instrument whose shape is this:
Another water that pulls off any cause of the tunics, and cut off that one with an instrument whose shape is this: And it is assembled with tweezers, however, the ends of them are sharp, so that the hole of each one is in the edge of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron blackened.
If this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut it with a blade whose shape is this: It should be sharp from one side and blunt from the other.
And then you cut one hole, and cut the other according to this method of incision, and let the incision of the patient be washed with water rubbed.
If there is a flow of blood, wash the wound with decoccions of pomegranates or mulberries, and similar things to those of the causes within which the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat that one before it is cured.
And some times there are other warts than the two warts in the mouth, and cut them according to what I have said about cutting two holes together.
And I have treated a woman with warts that were born in her mouth, which warts were of roan color, of little feeling, which had already closed the mouth of him, and the woman breathed well, and had already forbidden him to eat or drink anything, and was close to death if it did not stop;
And the lump has grown so much that it is pushing out two teeth, which have come out through two teeth.
Then I hid him with a sharp instrument and cut it, and threw that one away, and there was a great amount of it, and then I cut off the tongue of him with my hand, and then I put that one on the lump.
Then I cut off a large part of him, and he did not bleed but a little blood. Then absolutely his mouth was opened by that woman, and he started to drink water again, then I did not stop cutting those warts for a long time, and the warts succeeded one another in that place, which incised within that it is prolonged.
Therefore I operated on him and cauterized his testicles, also because of the addition; and therefore I walked around and did not know that God was with me then.
Chapter .xxxvii.
Of incision when it is heated.
When pus is found in the uvula, and it is heated and long, then it is called a 'perpendicular'; but if it is thick and round, then it is called a 'bubble'.
On the other hand, if it is cured with water that has been mentioned in the division, and you do not recognize your cure, and examination many times that the apostema is still there and subtle, then you should know that you cut out what is aggregated round; and if it is long, and is blood, of dark color or black, and is not a centimeter, then you should know that you have cut out his testicles, for in that there is fear on the patient.
And when you see the second time that I have described to you of its whiteness and length, then you should know that you should cut his testicles and press his tongue with an instrument by which it is shaped and put on a new one, and pull it down and cut it with one of two instruments that I describe in the incision of the two balls.
And you should not cut it except with water that is put on the natural term of addition; for if you cut him more, you will make him speak badly.
And the incision, use water with which I have described in the incision of the two balls, and cure it within so that it is cured.
On the other hand, if the patient was frightened by the incision of his testicles, so that he uses fire in the cauterization of him it is fear, and the way of cauterizing him it is not except with sharp water, for you should pause the top of the patient on the knee, and press his tongue with the instrument that I have described, and take from the water that I have described in the chapter of cauterization, and pour into it as if alive, and do not let it be thick or subtle, and then fill the cavity of the instrument whose form this is:
The extrimity of him its cavity in which the medicine has been put with the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument on the uvula, and the patient chews or spits because of the internal medicine, so that it does not send from that for a good reason about his testicles and makes them come out.
And then take your hand with the medicine, and press it on the uvula for a space of one hour within which it is blackened and numbed by the chewing of the medicine.
And if you want, take hold of it and wrap it over the end of the ray, and dip the hand in the medicine, and put the ray into the hand with the wrapped ray in a tube up to that the wrapped ray adheres to it, and let it be there because it will dry and fall off in three or four days.
And if you want to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and the cauterization wash in the circuit of the uvula with wrapped ray in a tube, and wash it with water that has been described in the circuit of him of the medicine, and let it be washed with soap and salt, and treated inside with incisions within so that it is cured.
This kind of cure is more safe than incision and less frightening from fear.
Some are cured of the uvula with water that is very subtle that cauterizes and cuts it, because it is cured with sub-fumigatio in this way: Prepare calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, marjoram arabic, chamomile, bread and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all of them, or some of them, in a pan, and put them in vinegar, and boil; and the pan be boiled with clean water, and be placed on the patient's bed, and over its head a trap is placed, about which is placed an instrument of iron according to this way; it should be made of silver or iron.
And then the end is put in the patient's mouth within so that the steam comes to the uvula on the quantulum, within which the uvula is dimly lit.
And repeat over those spots within so that they are dry, and you should know that you do not make this cure in the coming of the appearance of pustules, because it would adjust too much on the pustule, and do not let it be water, but rather the declaration of the pustule of him cauterized.
On the other hand, if you do not have this instrument with you, then take a cane and compose at the end of it a tube of sheep's stomach, so that the patient' s mouth is closed, because the tube of the stomach prevents the steam to burn the mouth.
This cure is good for health.
Chapter.xxxviii.
Of extraction of thorns and of water that adheres to the testicles, and of other causes.
Pustules adhere on the testicles or thorns or any other cause.
Then you should extract water that appears, and the eye sees it, because you press the tongue on the instrument in front of the sun, so that to you is declared which water is in the testicles.
And water that does not appear to you in the testicles, then you should make him vomit the patient before the food is digested in the stomach, because it brings about the cause of the attachment of the testicles is a foaming; or if he drinks one fish of oil or of radish or a piece of dry bread; or take a sponge of marine sea dried, and wring it hard with the fist, and then make the patient drink it, for it will make him vomit, because it comes to the place in which there are thorns and is extracted. And then take an eel and put it in the fist, and let it be sitting on a table and extracted; or take a pig and put it upside down, and let it be extracted.
On the other hand, if you do not make him vomit by those causes that I have described, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
It should be thicker than a small ray, and in the end of it there is a cavity that you put in the patient' s testicles with ease.
And the patient raise his head up, and you should know that the touching of his skull of the testicles, so that he does not eat with them or with a tooth, or that it is put on him hand.
However, the patient who puts it is more, because of his knowledge of the place of the attached cause and pulls up his hand to the instrument, all this according to the quantity that is prepared for him within so that he vomits.
Chapter.xxix.
Of extraction of blood thorns attached to the testicles.
When blood is extracted with water that I have described in the division of the cure with medicines and do not recognize it, then consider in the testicles of the patient on the sun, because you have moved the tongue of him with the instrument which I have described to you.
Then if you see the blood, extract it with a little ounce or a gentle hand carefully.
And if it is not possible to extract it in that way, then take a hollow tube and put it into the testicles of the patient, and place on the cavity of the tube an igniting iron, and pour as much water (as long as the blood has stopped being alive and has come out of the testicles) and abstain from drinking water.
And then take a full bucket of water to rub, and open his mouth in it, and wash his mouth with it; and don't drink anything from that or have the water next to him for an hour or more because the blood is cold when you feel it.
If it is not a fire-burned wound with water that we have mentioned, then smoke the patient's thigh with cumin or asafetida using the instrument that we have mentioned in the combustion of the uvula.
Boil water, so as to cool it down quickly.
And this is another way of doing surgery in smoke treatment for the patient' tongue; take a pipe in which charcoal is ignited and the pipe is covered with a blanket with a loop, and place the end of the instrument in that loop; then remove the smoke treatment; and place the patient' mouth on the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the smoke treatment is not fire-burned until you know that the smoke treatment has reached the patient' throat because the patient' throat is very quick to feel the smoke treatment.
And if it doesn' taste good, then do the smoke treatment again quickly, and prevent the patient from drinking, and eat salty foods and fruits, and don' drink water, and it is necessary that this treatment be fire-burned.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which the throat is removed from the patient' neck when seen; and it is similar to pliers except for once because it is in its curvature: which is placed on the patient' neck and its end is similar to an egret beak, which is sharp, so that when you touch anything it doesn' leave marks.
Chapter 10.
In which is the summary of surgery in regards to amputations and dissection.
The amputations are special surgeries, done in specific ways, following their remembrance of them, each one from this book.
And they are various in piercing and dissection of them by two ways, the first one being for the specific type of amputations, and the second because they deal with liquids.
And the second way is appropriate for the places where injuries occur, because the amputation wound in the head is different from that in the buttocks, and the same goes for amputations in the flesh, and each of them requires surgery.
And some amputations are those that heal without needing to be pierced, but rather because the wound has healed on its own or because it has been taken care of.
And other amputations are those that need to be cut when they are crossed, and do not heal according to their completion, such as amputation near a joint, because if the limb is prolonged within the body, and it is weakened by corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of the limb; or it is an amputation close to a main member, and if you delay piercing it, it will not heal properly towards the main member; or it is near the buttocks, so it is pierced without being madurat, and it does not matter if it is a male or female genitalia, because it does not cause any harm; but it needs to be cut carefully, and it is not complete unless it has been cut from the inside of the genitals, and the blood vessels are cut, so that it does not continue to flow. You should know the time for piercing the amputation, and then it is when it has healed.
You should know that it is when it has healed because there is a decrease in pain and fever, and an improvement in blood pressure and pulse rate, and the head of the amputation becomes less sensitive, and other symptoms appear.
And because you should know that piercing occurs in the place where pus comes out from the amputation site, and pus flowing from the wound's edge.
And the piercing should be done at an early stage of healing, whether it is in the members' joints or feet, and in the places where ligaments, nerves, or tendons are located; and finally, in any other place that does not reflect, because in those that reflect, use the piercing according to the member.
If the amputation is in a flesh location, then you should know that piercing occurs within the time frame of healing, according to its completion, for what has been said; because if you pierce it in front of the genitals, it prolongs the member of the person who is pierced, and it adds to their pain, and hardens their lips, and deepens their appearance.
And other amputations should be pierced according to the location of the flesh or body part that needs to be removed, or according to the part where the limb is needed.
And you should know that small piercings are administered, and in large amputations, large piercings or sections according to the variety of their size.
And other amputations are those in which the wound needs to be sutured and sewn shut, and it is done when it has already healed, such as in cases of wounds that have become infected and pus-filled.
And those that are sutured in dissection have three angles; and those that are sutured with a figure of a leaf, and those that are sutured for the amputations of the limbs.
And they are those in which round section or lunar section is administered, and it resembles this.
And the one that has a head should be pierced with superficial needles, because you should pierce it with shallow piercing or flat piercing only.
And when the amputation is large and has already collected some blood, pierce it and don' stop until you remove all the blood; take a piece out of it, and on another day, take out another piece, and then take out a larger piece, and then boil water with herbs, and let it cool down, and dip the wound in it to clean it.
And most importantly if the patient' humor is virile or feminine, or a child or an old person, because the animal spirit moves with the exit of blood, and it hardens the patient, and you should close their wounds.
You should keep this chapter carefully, and you should know that you avoid diseases, and consider whether the amputation wound is small or a flat section, then administer a single suture to close it; but if the amputation is large and the sections of the piercing are short, then pause your work in any place where they meet together.
And if in the amputation a part of the tendon or bone is cut away or broken, then you should know that you should tie it with a old man's thread or a thread of linen, and as soon as you have finished cutting off parts or breaking them, wipe the blood; and strengthen that within three days; and then process it and clean the wound with water and soap, and let it heal.
If blood flows during the surgery, you should administer warm water and vinegar in which wrap a linen cloth, and place it on the area where the blood is flowing, so that the blood does not dry out; because blood that dries can cause pain.
And if the bleeding continues, then you should know that you administer surgery and cure, and sprinkle the herbs that we have mentioned in various places; for example, in the wound itself, in the area where the blood is flowing, in the skin around it, and so on.
If it is wintertime, and the amputation site is near a joint, then you should know that you should wrap powder of wine or oil around the joints.
E if it is in the summer and the blisters are fleshy, then you should cover that you pour dust of the earth with water and oil or wine and all of this be washed within three days as we said, and then you should untie the blister and clean away that and prepare for the cure of him what is necessary within that is healthy.
Then so is what that is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of blisters universally, more by the way of distinction I have already said of all blister in what way it is a way of the cure of him by chapters separately.
Chapter .xli.
Of the section of blisters that come in the shoulder of the arm.
In the small area of the arm, there are blisters of different sizes that contain skin that is like them in nature and the sizes of their motes.
And from them come drops, and those that contain moisture similar to lemon juice. And those that contain moisture similar to blood, and similar to them in nature; and those that are hard and dry.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those that do not cause pain, you should be careful with the extraction of those that do not cause harm.
And the operation in the section of them is that you spray them with an instrument whose shape you apply appropriately at this point, which is called entomes, until you know that it contains.
But if what it contains is moisture, then you should split it by section according to its length by a superficial section according to this form:
And you begin in the section of the line of B within the line of G. Since the moisture is drained, then you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because the others return if left of that cause.
And you should dip the cotton in Egyptian oil if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and you fill that with water and leave it within itself for another day, because with water it corrodes all that is covered by that film.
And you should repeat the dip in Egyptian oil twice if it does not feel good to him with water, within that you trust that there was no cause of that film; then cure the plague with oil within that is healed.
And if the blister contains fat nodes, then you should cut it according to this form: with a shape of crotz, and you cut it between two lips of the section and scrape that completely from all sides, and you exert your strength in the extraction of the skin that contains it.
But if your surgery causes pain, then first of all I will tell you.
And resembling, you make in the blister that it is lappified in the section and in the cure according to what I have told you; and the section of a lappified blister is lighter, because it is scarce of flesh and little moisture.
And some times those blisters are more painful in the head of men to which there is no moisture at all; and that cause is because I cut on a blister in the head of an old woman and tore it so that it bled profusely, and if it had hit someone with a hard object, it would have been infected.
But in the other blisters an accident in the head is not included in this chapter, as those blisters that come on children's heads and their roots are the ears, but the section of all these is a superficial section.
And the piercing of those from the top is lower than that from the bottom so that it is relieved the pain of the wound to the skin on the top.
Then you should cure them with water that is necessary for the cure of him.
Chapter .xii.
Of the section of scrofulas that happen in the neck.
These blisters in the throat and neck and the shoulders are visible, and some times they happen in other parts of the body.
And those that happen in the throat, and those motas that are born among them, and all scrofula of those is broken its own skin, and so with the nodes and blisters on the head, which we have mentioned.
The sizes of these scrofulas are drops, because some of them are small and dry blisters, and those that contain moisture, and the evil ones which I do not obey for the cure of them.
Then in the one that you see of good disposition in the Treatment, of which the color of water that is revealed is similar to the color of the shoulder, and it is pleasant from all parts, and it does not stick to the nerves of the throat, or to the veins, or to the pain, and it is not thick, then you should cut it with a superficial section from the top to the bottom of the body part of the line of G. within the line of B., and scrape that completely, and take out two hairpins, or two oncis if there is need of them, as we have said in the blisters on the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that it is not cut the vein or nerve.
And be careful not to cut the vein or nerve. And if you cut the skin with a sharp instrument, and if it does not please you in your work, then pause at this point the pain of the blister, and bring out some blood from a vein or artery so that there is less pain, and start the blister again, and make it soft, and begin to be eaten. When the blood is cut off.
Then returns to your work within which you finish it.
And then you should ask the patient if there is any cause of the other small scrofula, and then cut them and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula from its root. Then before cutting that with a sharp blade, and let it fall on the ground, and then if it falls on itself, it is no problem.
And you should fill that with a young cotton that you have already dipped in Egyptian oil, and then cure it.
And if you cut that scrofula completely, then you should adjust the two lips of the blister and clean it as much as possible.
But if you see that there is too much moisture on the scrofula because of its size, then you should cut the root of it, and then clean it and administer the stitch and water that is said.
And those scrofula that contain moisture, you should pierce them with a superficial piercing here where the growth of his hair appears, and pause the piercing of those water that is lower down in the body part, as we have said.
And you should administer the piercing, and similar to oil on those, so that it corrodes the water that is more than corrosion. And then when you see that the blister has been cleaned, then you should cure it with oil of meat within that is healed.
Chapter .xiii.
Of the section of the accidental blister on the forehead.
They said that this section is an accident in the plague, and I did not see anyone in our town who had that disease.
This is the inscription of the sermon of those.
In men some may be inclined to the excreta of the epilottus, where it is avoided that the extract should come out by water, which is not done with care for all veins and most of the mallet are here.
In those who have blisters in the mouth or in the ear or both, if the mallet is not in the nose, it should be avoided from the section of epilottus to prevent loss which is done by perforation.
So when we want water, let us inscribe the epilottus with three circles of the epilottus or four at small section for the height in this that it is between two circles by quantity, that the section is in ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient to section, for it is deprived of meat and the vessels of saint of him are then.
And if the doctor is little, it is customarily that he extend the ribbon of the ear with tenci, and then cut the ribbon inside so that it reaches to the canal, avoiding the vessels of saint if any cause.
And then inscribe the plug according to what we have described; and it is indicated on the section of the channel by the flame that is of him that is with water which is of his disromput and for the absence of the voice.
And leave the plug open for a while.
So when the hour is remounted in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the plug of the plug, and cut that alone the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the meat go well so that it is healed.
And Al-Buqaasis that the head of the sermon which we have described, presentation is not except that you see that some of these blisters have already opilated the ear of the mallet, and the mallet has come within death, and the rope of him is broken, and some go to inscribe the epiglottis so that he breathes the mallet over the place of the plug by some respiration, and is saved from death.
And through water I command that the plug be open until the evil of the mallet is consumed; and it is the evil of him by three days; and then the hour commands thus the plug, and heals that until it is healed.
And water that I see through my metys, is that a servant he hold a knife and cut it in his ear and inscribe one part of the cana of the lung, and I was called to the cure of him, and I left the mug on the same way as the mug of the moridos, and discovered the plug and left the saint which was yssit of the small plug.
So you have confessed that it had not inscribed vein nor guidegi, and the wind left of the plug, and healed that within until it was cured.
And did not happen to the servant if not it has rawier in the voice, and then some days he returned to the improvement of his dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilottus there is no fear.
Chapter 34.xliiv.
Of section on the epilottus which happens in the ear far away, and it is called hernia of the ear.
This blister, named hernia of the ear, is a large one according to the color of the body, and it is in women.
And it is according to two ways, for it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one does not do to heal.
And the accidental one is according to two ways of which one is similar to nodes grass, and the other way is similar to blister which is made by nodection of an artery, and in this one is fear. And it should not be that you make a presumption to him as if it were a small thing. And you will not make a presumption to him as if it were a small thing. And if you see that it is similar to nodes grass, and it is not suspended to any of the veins, then you cut that one there with the knife, and extract it with water which contains it from the flesh and the bursiclam; and if not, then search all his being, and then cure the place with water which is customarily used for healing, within that it is healed.
Chapter 35.xliv.
Of section of the nodules.
The nodules are a type of node, and I have already said all the types of them in the division.
And it is customarily that I describe this difference between node and exiture with care.
So you say that the exiture has quality and fever and violent pains within that it is soothed by the boil of the superfluity; and the completion is putrefaction which the hour stops the fever, the pain and the heat.
In men, however, a node does not have quality or fever or pain, and it is counted as if it were a small lion which is in the nose and throat.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a swelling and does so if it were a small swelling with water, and the colors of the water are little ones, according to what I have said in the division.
So when you approach the cure of a node, ask that one and investigate that beginning with the instrument which is called an intramuscular, according to how it comes in the chapter which is near this.
And it is a way of inquiry of blisters and all the nodes, and it is because you take this instrument and introduce it into the place which is more humid that you suspect in the blister, and you will turn the tools little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the ribbon.
And then finish your hand according to the measurement of the size of the blister, and then extract the intramuscular and consider that it is done in the trace of it.
And if the water has been lost from its current, of whatever color it is, then you inscribe it in a superficial section according to what I have said in other blisters.
And if there is not water from the intramuscular trace, then you know that it is fat.
And dry on it in a section which does not have a form of a crust according to this shape: As I taught you, and suspend that one with nails, and extract the ribbon of all parts with ease, and keeps the flesh or hernia, if you can, on that one; and extract that vein with the node.
In men, if it is torn in the operation, it is not possible to extract that vein, and there are little vessels in which it is torn; and then you extract them with care within that it does not harm anyone.
For if it does not hurt anyone, little or much, the node returns according to what is customarily used.
And if you think that it has hurt a little part of him, then completely close the plug of some corrosive and sharp powders, and press the plug on that one which is an epilottus, and cures that one with another cure within that it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then you cut the two lips of him and heal that one with water which contains it.
In men, if the pulse of the vein is to him opposite, or not-pulsatile, then you cut and plug the place where it hurts, three times a day until it can be healed, and returns to inscribe that water which is torn from the node.
Chapter .xlvi.
On the instruments necessary in section and perforation.
Of the three shapes of the instruments, one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
The large instrument shape is this:
The small instrument shape is this:
If the instrument is made of iron, of ivory, or of the sharp ends of feathers, so that the instrument fits well into the apertures.
And these are the shapes of the instruments, and they are called albed, and one of them is called beri.
Of three shapes, for one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
The large shape of the instrument, form of L:
The medium shape of the instrument, form of λ:
The small shape of the instrument, form of l:
Let it be known that they are for those apertures and incisions and fistulas and abscesses, so that among them some are of the bones and others are of other causes.
And some are curved, thick, and pointed, such as large needles, which are sewn with linen thread, and they are made of brass, or of iron, or of silver; and the most common ones are made of brass.
And the instruments of black feathers are made, that it is known that through them the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflected, are reflected by their own levitation on those reflections.
Of three shapes, for some of them are long, and others are medium-length, and others are short, according to the amount of the width of the fistula and the tightness of λ.
The large shape of the instrument of lead:
The medium shape of the instrument of lead:
The small shape of the instrument of lead:
The shapes of the needles are of various kinds, for some of them are simple, each with a single curve, and they are three kinds: large, small, and medium-sized.
They are needle-like, and they are three in number.
And some needles have two curves, and they are three in number.
And some needles have three curves, and they are also three in number.
All of these are necessary in their place.
The small single shape of the needle, form of L:
The large needle shape with two curves: The medium needle shape with two curves: The small needle shape with two curves:
The large needle shape with three curves:
The medium needle shape with three curves:
And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the knots and apertures are cut and punctured, and they are three in number, for one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
The large scalp shape:
The medium scalp shape:
The small scalp shape:
The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not stopped in such a way, but rather that it is made smooth in order to heal the wound of incising a vein or a nerve, and because of this it heals well the wound of an abscess.
And these are the shapes of the ointments, and they are three in number: large, medium, and small, as follows:
If it is made of iron, and it appears similar to rayon by means of a solution containing alcohol.
It is in the sharp side pointed with a covered edge, and on the inner and outer sides, when desired, it has vits.
The shapes of the spatulas, which are placed between the teeth so that the perforation of the abscesses does not affect the teeth, and they do not affect the taste, and they are three in number: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The shapes of the wands with which the flow of blood is stopped, and they are three in number: large, medium, and small; form of L:
If it is made of iron, round in shape and of a certain length, and it is thin.
It is said that these are the shapes of the wands, large, medium and small, in order that through them the flow of blood may be stopped at a fast pace, and then, upon first use, it is not medicine.
However, they do not use them to stop the blood from flowing throughout the body, but only at the carotid arteries, the armpits, the breast-lids, and the navel, resembling the latter in shape to the former.
Some small instruments are made in this way; and by this shape the blood is stopped when made with a scalpel or an incision of a vein or artery.
Some wands are made round according to this shape:
Chapter .xlix.
On the treatment of male breasts, which are assembled from women.
Some wands are inflated with air the breasts of men who have been covered by a blanket, and when they fall asleep, they are inflated, and the breasts of women are assembled, and we do not know which is which.
And if you wish to cut those by means of lunar section according to this shape, from the line B to the line G, and then cut off the whole grotesque, and then apply the medicine to the ulcer, and then join together the two lips of the ulcer, and heal it.
And if the breast declines to the right side and is softened by its magnitude when placed against the breast of a woman, then cut it in two halves, like a moon, and join them together, so that each half contains a portion of the other, and then join them again, so that the line between them is straight, and from this shape draw the line B and the line G. And then cut off the grossness, and then apply the medicine to the ulcer, and then join together the two lips of the ulcer, and heal it.
And if you do not please the incision of that which is covered with a blanket, and with the flow of blood, then apply to it an ingredient of an acid solution, and leave it until it is cured of the ulcer, and then cut off what has been corroded by the acid, which is smooth from the grossness, and then heal what remains.
Chapter .xlix.
On the perforation of abscesses that come from below.
Those abscesses that come from below are of three kinds of scrofulae: severe ones, moderate ones, and mild ones.
And some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are cut with lunar section according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all the fluid has been removed from the ulcer, then add a mixture of coto and water, and leave it until the next day.
And let the wound remain there and be cleansed well with water until it is healed.
And if the swelling of the joints and nodos is, and that of the scrofula, then you should cut into it with a scalpel as we have said in the section on scrofula by sectioning it transversely.
And if the plague is extended on a foot that has become gangrenous, then administer cauterization as we have said before.
Chapter .xlix.
Of sectioning of abscesses that happen by artery or vein.
When an artery is broken and the clot is consolidated that is over that one, then watch out for abscesses: for it is known that inflammation and abscess occur through the artery or vein: indeed, when the abscess is due to an artery, it is long and located in the part of the body where the vessel runs; and when you cut into the abscess with a knife, you can hear a squeaking sound.
And that which is due to a vein is round about the neck of the body.
And sectioning of such abscesses is wrong, and most often in the area that leaves the aysselhas (groins), and the armpits, and the throat, and other places of the body; and it is very bad, since the cure with iron must be avoided, and if it is on the extremities or on the head, it should be avoided.
But over that which is due to an inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut it transversely in length; and then open the section with a hook and free the artery, and uncover the area.
And then place a needle over that one and let it pierce into the other side, and make the artery turn twice on itself in two places, -- which causes a person to get double hernia in the temple area from two arteries.
And then pierce the place between two ligaments with a spike until the whole thing comes out, and let the abscess be dissolved.
And then administer a cure that generates poison within, so that the ligaments do not come out; and then heal it well with water until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to the sectioning of a vein, then you should hold your hand so that it is above the possible place of the abscess with the knuckle, and then open the section with a needle from the place where you are holding your hand, and let the needle pierce; and make the double thread go around in two places according to what I said to you about the ligament of an apple of two parts to two extremities of the thread.
If you are afraid that the thread will come out, then open the section with a needle first and then let the needle pierce; and make four ligatures of the threads.
Then dry the abscess in its own place until water comes out of it, and then cut off the excess of the clot, and let the fluid that comes out from it dry up.
Then place over it a sponge that you have immersed in oil and vinegar, and then administer the cure with water and oil until it is healed.
Chapter L of the abscess that happens due to nerve twisting.
As it is due to an artery or a vein, and also apparently due to excessive work, and somewhat similar to that which occurs from blows.
It is done from above in the places of the auxiliaries or the head, or at any place where joints are joined together.
And it is a difficult abscess, and it resembles the color of the other part of the body, and when it becomes hot due to heat, you can feel the patient's fever.
And it is not an abscess that forms in the middle of the body, and therefore the clot remains there, and it affects both parts evenly, neither before nor behind.
Therefore, of those that are at the joints, it is not known to be due to iron, since it would go against nature.
But over the head or forehead it is with a spike. But if it is a small abscess, then cut it off at the roots.
And if it is large, then hang it with a chain and let it dry out, and then cut it off; and sew up the area, and heal it well until it is healed.
Chapter L.
Of sectioning of an abscess that occurs from the mouth to the belly.
And let the men who have this problem be given the herb garlic in their food and in their drink; for it is similar to those that resemble mushrooms, of which the roots are thin and the head is large; and let the lips of these people be treated, and let them be from those that are small, and let them be from those that are large.
And I have seen one, and in its belly there were two mushrooms that seemed like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with thin roots.
And the lips of these people were turned upside down, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
So you cut those open and sewed up the other one from above, and there were eighteen teeth in it. and the other had only one tooth.
And the operation of cutting them is that you consider if the patient' water is hot, and the color of their skin is white, moist, with thin roots; then open them up with a hook, and let them be in your presence, for it will expel half of them; and if they are given to you, cauterize them.
And if the patient is a little bit frightened and worried, refrain from cutting with iron; but then let there be plucked fresh lead, and hold it to the part that I have described; and let it rest for two days.
Then tighten the string of lead; and then, if it does not cut, it is difficult work.
But if the lead is of thick roots, then there is no cause for fear or worry in cutting it up, and most of all in that which is in the belly.
It may be that you cut the larger one of them, and then cauterize it so that it does not grow back.
Then heal that area so that the plague is healed.
And beware that you do not cut up lead that has a dark color, and little feeling, and that looks like cancer.
And I have remembered this warning.
Chapter LII.
Of cure of the umbilical hernia.
Umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons: or because of tears in the skin that covers it, and whether there is a bud there as well as other ruptures; or because of blood flowing from a vein or artery as to what happens before it, or because of constriction of breath in it.
If it is due to tears in the skin and the bud coming out of it, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body; and it is difficult pain, and it appears in different places. If it is due to the bud coming out, then its place is opposite from what I have told you, with a different degree of heat, and when you push it with your hand, it retreats; and it becomes very hot inside, and there are many different movements in it.
May it be that by moisture, it is hard to press your hand without pain, nor is it forced or felt.
And if it is because of heat, then these signs appear as a dark blush on the skin.
May it be that not of meat, then there is a hard, thick and durable apoplexy, and it remains according to the amount.
May it be that by wind, then touch from him is painful.
And the operation in it is that you should consider if the prominence of the navel is because of heat from fire or blood, or wind; then cover so that you are forbidden to cure it, for in this there is fear and dread as I have taught in the chapter where I said about apoplexy by fire and blood.
And if the prominence of the navel is because of the intestine or hernia, then command the malady that he has his ale (urine) on him, and let him stand extended; and with your hand touch around the whole navel, and command him to stay facing between your two legs, and with a sharp instrument touch lightly around the navel in the place where you have touched it; and extend most of the apoplexy to the hair roots around it by means of an oil or lye suitable.
Then break the apoplexy that is extended on the member and insert the finger into that spot where you have touched it, and seek the intestine; and if you cannot reach it by means of the member, then pull it with force and push the intestine to the insides of the belly.
And if you have reached the hernia, then take that one with a finger; and cut away its excesses.
May it be contrary to your fire or blood, then touch that point again, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two strings strongly and insert the two needles into the path which you have made around the apoplexy by means of a knot, which should pass through it; and then tighten the apoplexy in four parts around the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place within that it may heal by itself, or cut away that part when it has thinned out and then treat that with water that heals within that it is cured.
And if the prominence of the navel is because of nothing but meat or moisture, then you should cut away the apoplexy as I have said before and destroy heat or moisture, which you find in it, and then treat that with water that heals within and solidifies that place.
Chapter 3.li.
Of the Treatment of Fractures.
We have said, in the division, of the different kinds of fractures and in what way they are treated with medicines, and that they heal quickly if not ulcerated; and we have said that a fracture is generated in the greatest care for the treatment of it.
And they say that some small fractures are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, as when the fracture is in the breasts or the crotch and similar parts of the members, especially when it is just beginning.
May it be that it is old and big, then do not try to treat it, for I have not seen how it can heal of itself, nor have I ever seen one arrive at water.
And the operation in it is that you go first and leave the patient and purify some portions with black cholera, and then mend those who are deformed by the apoplexy if they are obviously deformed.
Then prepare the patient with the preparation in which he is located for the operation, and then give him an emetic with strong emetic properties within that it does not disturb any cause of its wounds. And let the wound run its course, and do not disturb that leeching, and squeeze the places, and wash the blood away with your hand or with an instrument suitable for your purpose.
May it be contrary to your strong wound of fire or blood, then cauterize that within that the flow of the wound stops, and then treat that with the other treatment within that it is healed.
Chapter 4.li.
Of the Treatment of Hydropic Disease.
We have already recommended, in the division, of the different kinds of hydropic disease of water, and the signs of each kind, for the treatment of it with medicines.
That which is cured with iron is only the species of algorism alone, and it does not approach iron to the species of tympany or the species of hyposarcasm, because water is deadly.
And when you have already treated this species of hydropic disease with medicine and do not understand your treatment, then know that if the patient has been cured or has another hydropic disease, as when it is coughing or colicky, similar to those, then keep away from iron, for there is danger about water.
May it be that you find the patient very useful, and only has hydropic disease, not child or old age, then the method of operation for him is that you raise the patient between your two legs, and the servant raises his hand over the area to press on the navel with his hand, pushing water out from the bottom of the penis, and then take a sharp instrument according to this form:
is made up of two sharp ends, one at each end as long as a fingernail, but it is to be done little by little so that in the operation you do not pass into the hernia, and then put on it.
And you should consider if the generation of hydropic disease is because of the intestine, for then it is necessary that you move away from the navel by three fingers on each side, in the right place above the penis.
May it be that the generation of hydropic disease is because of the illness of the child, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is because of itself, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not say that your section is over the rib on which you want to operate the patient so that the excesses do not run to that place.
Then pierce the instrument completely through, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand with the blade between the two halves of the blade, and then squeeze it; and if the quantity is a little less than a fingernail.
Then pierce the cypher so that it comes out of the blade into the desired place, and it is a place of water. Then remove it and insert an instrument which has this form: is made of thin silver tube; it is made of silver or lead or brass, and at the end is a small loop, and on its sides are three loops: two from one end and one from the other end; and it is finished with a sharp edge according to the feather shape, sometimes like this:
In the end of it is a sturdy loop, for when the instrument reaches water, then let it run back on the instrument halfway, because if you do not take away from it as much as it runs away, then you will give to the patient the resolution of his spirit animal, or bring him near to death.
Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Then extract the instrument and retain the water that causes this as much as it is retained by the ligature that retains the thread that runs over the knot on which you are told to perform that second technique in that way.
And then repeat the instrument the next day if the patient tolerates water, and extract a small amount of water, and make it stay for some days on suspicion, and guard against error until it doesn't retain the water but a little bit.
If you fear for the patient, and let go of a lot of water, then do so that it is buried in sand, and make a bath with soap, and wait under the sun for a long time; and cure him with desiccating medicines unless he is healed.
And then cauterize over the stomach, and the instrument is removed from water, according to what I have told you that it is preceded.
Chapter .lv.
Of the cure for children who are born with the holes of the urine not perforating.
Some are born with the head of the child's mixture not perforating (or is straight through or isn't in its place).
Therefore, when treating the perforation of wine so often as it is born with a subtle motion according to this form:
And then place on the thread a small lead nail and bind it, and you for three days or for .iiii.three.
And when he wants to urinate, he gets up and urinates; and then return it.
If you don' stop the lead, it is possible that the urine that goes over the place, doesn' allow this closure.
If the thread on which you are working is straight, then treat it with a lead nail as I have said, for several days unless it is increased.
If the thread on which you are working is not in its place, it is because of this that the one who is born with it, and the thread is the end of the penis, so that he cannot urinate at the back, unless he raises the penis to the front; and it is not a generation, because the sperm cannot arrive at the mother according to its rectitude, and it is bad in a subtle way.
And the way of performing it on him is that the patient be laid on his back, and the head of his penis be extended with your left hand to facilitate its extraction, and incise the tip of the penis at the place of the perineum with a sharp knife, or that you shave some hair, so that the edge of his penis looks like the head of it, and so that the thread falls into its place according to what has been said.
And guard that in your surgery of the flow of the blood, because it is because you work; and pause with him until the blood stops flowing, and cure the plague unless he is healed.
Chapter .lvi.
Of the cure for the enlargement of the foreskin on the penis and its corruption, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Are seen with this swelling on the penis and is an eminence of flesh that is dark.
And from this one is malicious and another is not-malicious.
Not-malicious, stop it with a small amount of a subtil medicine and cut off that part unless it is completely cured; then dip it in Egyptian ointment; and then dip it every day in a refined ointment unless he is healed.
And if the swelling is malicious, of its color, then stop it that you administer a pointed cautery to the incisions and to the rasping of it.
If the swelling is in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and one part of it is inside the foreskin and another part is outside of it, then stop it that you hold the swelling which is inside at the beginning unless it is consolidated; and then treat that which is outside, because when you treat that whole, it isn' guaranteed that it won' be torn.
And are seen with the genitals and the foreskin becoming black and corrupted, then stop it that you conquer all of it that has already become dark and is beginning to rot or has rotted; and then dip it in water that is mixed with flour from a black radish and with three parts of salt and crushed.
And then cure him with the other cure unless he is healed.
If there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
Because a lunar cauterization that is made in two different places, because it is a cure for the flow of blood and for the corruption of the plague.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and is destroyed entirely in the hour, then stop it that you introduce a lead tube into its meat through which the patient urinates through that one.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless it is circumcised; and when it occurs because of the plague or because of a abscess), then extract with a sharp knife within that it is dissolved the ligament and the head of the penis is completely released.
And if it is difficult to cut out those accurately, then stop it that you extract with a sharp knife the head of the penis and the foreskin, and so it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is easily pierced by its subtlety.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a small lead, which is already melted in water by scrubbing so that it doesn' adhere anymore.
And then it should be cured with vi stiptic unless it is consolidated.
Chapter  .lvii.
Of the cleaning of children and the cure for the swelling that occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continence as it does with other plagues: but because it is part of our work and our will, and its benefits are primarily for the children, it is necessary that we assign this best operation and less painful way to save them from peril.
So I say that the youths do not say in some of their laws, because they don' use them in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience that this causes me to be amazed at most of the artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a sharp knife and an incision; and they use a ligament with a needle.
And I have tried all these ways and did not find a better purification than with scissors, a sharp knife in the purification with an incision, because it moves the cord over it, because the cord of the foreskin has two tunics, and the tight one is left behind, and the strong one forces another incision and pain certainly. And the purification that is done by the sharp knife, and it is done with a finger, which is used by the barbers, is not safe to make an incision at the end of the penis member, because it is strongly inserted into the thread on which you are working.
If in the operation with a knife, firmly avoid hurting yourself and corrupting your work. And the child's cord is short by nature, and twines in such a way that there is no need of cutting it, and I have seen this.
More about the cutting that is done with scissors and threads, I learned this because the scissors are of proportional incision, for in such way as the keenness that is used is also so; and therefore when you press your hand with proportional two sharpnesses and cut it according to a comparison at one time; and is made a compression of the cord to a contorted shape of all starting, on which no mistake of all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you let the child rest mostly if it is of those who understand a small, that you do not cut but that you tie the cord to its hock only, and that you let it rest until another day.
Then make him happy in all this manner that is at your possibility of what that receives his intelligence. And then make him sit between your two arms firmly prepared, and don't get dizzy; and hide the scissors in your hand or hold them on his foot, that the child doesn't see those nor anyone of the instruments.
And then put your hand on the child' hock and blow into the cord, and pull that which is gathered up on the hock's head, and cut it off from what is attached to it with filthiness.
The shape of the scissors for cutting, this is the shape:
If the end of one blade is not sharp and the other is, so that the edge of the hook is not cut, and the length of the two sharpnesses is so with the length of two hands clasped together.
More about the mistake in cutting is that a very strong pain flees all the internal cord, or broken from it; you must cut it.
And therefore when you extend that from your hand to your elbow in front of the incision' place and cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your thumb, then take it with your index finger and cut it.
More about if they have passed three days, and then make him that is swollen with the hock' injury rest; and then let him sit until he is cured with ease, and cut it according to what you prepare.
And keep the child's head away from him, for it will not be good for him.
And therefore treat that child with water that solidifies the plague of the dust that we have described in the treatise of the dusts.
And if the cord is cut too much above measure, and you obey the cuts too much, then it will not be felt.
More about the treatment of that child with water that we have said to be cured.
Chapter LXVIII.
Of Treatment for Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to fear or a cold shower, or from bad food or dirty meat, and similar to those that we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine is not dissolved with water that we have said to be effective for the cause in the patient, then make a syringe of silver and thin leather, so as the tube of pen of goose quill is of long length in similarity to a palm and half, which is the thin canal at its tip.
And the manner of introducing urine into the patient is that you tie the cord double and place it in the end of the leather or skin for a good hold; and then introduce the cord' ends into the tube' end, and cut with scissors if there is any surplus cause of the leather, more introduce it into the tube with force; and then put the tube on the patient' neck and fill it with water.
And then make the child sit on a pillow, and put the bladder of him over his back and the hock with water and oil.
And then introduce the tube with ease until it touches the hock' root; and then double the hock up from behind at the bend; and then make the tube touch that which goes to the bladder, and this should be done if there is no cause found, but it is put into him because of the urgency.
And then take the cord away from the leather slowly, for urine causes the leather to contract.
Then make him go pee, and use a syringe, don't stop making water with the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
Chapter LIX.
Of Quality of Bladder' Clamping with a Clencher and Similar Instruments.
When the bladder' ulcer or blister occurs, or is cut, and wants to distil water and medicine in it, then use an instrument called a clencher, and this is its form: Si non hay desus le malaute, no fayt. E si es dolores per poyre o por carnada, lahoras fai curacio per urina retenguda en la vesica, e non fayt.
If there is no sound from the patient, then he is silent; and if it is closed, then it is sealed. And in that one three holes: two of a single hole, and then twice.
At the beginning is a tight place, in which water is trapped, and then according to the quantity that has been trapped there, add as much more as the cause is drawn from the humors, so it is thrown away, and when it is expelled, throw it with water, and when it is expelled far away, according to how a clencher is used in the ship battles of the sea.
So when you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, make the end of the clencher touch the moisture, and then throw it with water that is forced out, for the moisture is thrown out in the clencher' hole.
And then introduce the end of the clencher in the hock according to what we have described in the syringe; and then throw with water that throws it, for that moisture goes into the hock' hole, and then it is thrown into the bladder as well; and the patient should be relieved.
The shape of the thin clencher with which the bladder is clenched, and this is its form: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en la cap de lu.
And be made of silver or lead, which is shaped like a small feather, and placed carefully inside it.
Then take a bladder from a sheep or cow, and place the moisture you want to crystallize inside it, and tie that between two strong iron rings together with a double knot, and heat that moisture over fire.
Then insert the end of the crystallization into the pipe.
Then place your hand over the bladder with the moisture you want to stretch and heat until it reaches the bladder, so that the patient can feel that moisture has entered the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder, take a goat or sheep bladder and make it into a circle; pierce that completely; then insert a strong ring tightly in those holes, so that they spin; then add the circle so that it is attached to it, since you pause on that water which you want to separate, and smell and pour.
Then tie that in the instrument and make it so that you attach it to the bladder, and express your hand into which the moisture will enter into the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Of extraction of stone.
We have already spoken about the types of stone and their cures, and the difference between stone formed in the kidneys and stone formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
We have also spoken about the stone that requires surgery and cauterization.
The stone formed in the bladder itself is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I will now present those with manifest explanation and abbreviation.
Therefore say that the stone formed in the bladder mostly appears in children; and from the signs of it is that the urine passed from the bladder is similar to water in its fineness, and appears in sand; and the bladder rubs its edge, and motes appear, and is drawn out; and there is a stinging sensation.
It is easy to cure children of that disease before they reach twelve years, but difficult to treat it in the old. But in young people it is half-cured by water, since it is between those ages.
And of that age at which the stone is larger and the cure easier; and if it is small, it is opposite to that.
Therefore, at the beginning of the cure of that disease, cover with a crystal of lead those parts that are affected; for that crack allows the entry of the stone, which some people prevent by applying oil to it.
Then take the lead with the patient's feet and tie it tightly and gently burn it until it enters the bladder opening, or jump from place to place.
Then make a cut between your hands and the patient' bladders are apart, so that the entire bladder is hanging down from its sides.
Then turn it over and all of it upside down.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately cut off that part with a sharp cut.
And if you do not cut off all of it with a sharp cut, then cover it with oil from the left hand side; if it is a child, or from the middle if it is a grown-up person, and insert that into its rectum. Then turn it over until the stone has fallen out of its own accord. And turn that small by small towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on that part with your finger and expel it from its sides; find out where you made the cut.
And order the minister to press his hand over the bladder; and order another minister with his right hand to stretch the genitals at their sides, and on the left hand to tie a string where they are cut off.
Then insert a spatum that does not hurt; this is the way of it: and cut it in two with the spatum between the buttocks and the genitals, not at the middle, going back from the left side of the crotch; and make that cut over the stone and the testicle, or if you want to make a transverse cut, so that the cut is wide outside and tight inside according to the amount of stone that has been passed, and no more, since the testicles are easily injured when they are cut from behind.
You know that there is no stone in which it does not hurt; therefore its extraction by water is difficult.
And of that water is like a nut, and is round, and is not easily extracted.
Therefore if it is the stone that does not hurt, insert it into the crevice.
And if it is not like that, then cover it with a thin cloth, or press it gently, so that the end of it does not slip away; or insert a small and curved instrument into it.
If you cannot handle it, then increase the tension slightly, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off with vinegar that is three times boiled.
If the stone is larger than a pea, at the beginning press your hand into the opening of the bladder, and cut off; then press a small string onto it; and, seemingly, if there are more than two motes, make the cuts smaller.
If the stone is very large, ignorance is your friend; for two things happen to the bladder: either it passes away, or it becomes stuck because of continuous urine flow; indeed, the location is not completely solid.
But administer by expulsion from within it if it does not come out; or insert a sharp instrument to extract the stone in pieces.
Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the mouth with aloe enemas and dragon's blood, and bind it up. Then place an oil cloth over the patient, or rub with rosin and water, or with rosewater and salt water, so that it may swell.
Then turn the patient around, so that the bladder is hanging down from its neck, and do not remove the ligature for three days.
And when you have removed the ligature, bathe that part in water and oil, and cure it with a solution of iodine and bacillus within three days.
But if in the wound there is swelling due to coldness and pain, as if it were frozen; and if urine cannot pass from the bladder due to the stone (for it is known that such a thing causes the bladder to rot and putrefy), then insert the testicle into the wound, since it causes the bladder to drain.
Then wash that part with rosewater, water and salt; and in opposition to all this, with water that is known to be useful for the cure within three days.
So you will understand how to treat those who are ill and to administer medicines, which are placed on the affected parts;
If the stone is small and is lodged in the meat of the bladder, and it is stuck there; if urine cannot pass due to that stone, then administer an enema with water that has been boiled three times before it reaches the bladder, since ten veguadas by this cure are considered a cut; and I have already warned you about a perforator of iron, from which this is the form of it:
from the triangular extremities, taken, fixed in a post.
Then take hold firmly, and place your hand on that one, so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the shaft, piercing easily into so that the piercer comes out at that place. Then rotate the piercer in your hand at that small place little by little, and you will pierce the piercing from both sides so that it does not go through; for urine is then discharged completely.
Then place your hand over that which is round on the edge of the part from which the shaft emerges, for that is wrinkled, and it is through there that the urine passes, and the patient is cured.
But if this cure does not suit you for some reason that prevents it from working on you, then take hold of one with your hand from below, and another above the wound. Then cut across that place in the shaft between two strips. Then take out that one. Then remove the ligature and clean the wound with water.
And it is not necessary to hold the shaft from below so that it does not return to the bladder, but rather, so that it does not leave its cavity; for when the hold on the shaft is released, the fluid returns to its place and inflames the wound.
And it is necessary for you to hold the shaft from above when you cut, so that you lift up the edge above, or that the fluid returns to its place, and thus inflames the wound; then you can say what has been said.
Chapter LXVI.
On the removal of a woman's bladder.
The bladder in the woman's body is generated little by little.
But if you have a bladder with any of those diseases, the cure for it is difficult, and some unusual methods are required.
The first one is that the woman is strong and her bladder is large.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who can expose her bladder when she drinks, or one who has had children.
The third reason is that you have not taught this skill to women, primarily because of the operation with your hand.
And the fourth reason is that the place of incision on a woman' bladder is far from the place where the bladder lies, so as not to injure it with your knife; and in that place there is danger.
But if necessity compels you to do this, then know that you take a woman with a full bladder, and it is a risk for her.
But if you lack that one, then seek out another woman who is subtle and skilled, or present a married woman who has given birth to a child in the custom of women, or a woman for this skill, as this is the way of women.
Then bring that one forward, and order her to do whatever you command, from the examination of the bladder to the start of the procedure; for this is how it should be: if the woman is strong, then let her place her foot and hold her bladder.
Then if she obstructs that one, remove her from her position, and order her to cut into it.
But if she is not strong, then order the married woman to place her foot in the cavity of the bladder and cut into it; for she places her hand over the bladder, and cuts with care.
Then if she obstructs that one, then know that it is gradual and difficult to reach the bladder through her opening, reaching from above her navel towards the corner of the thigh; for it is in that place that the fluid collects.
Then cut across that place of the leg where the bladder is located from above, so that it does not move back into its cavity; for it will not be able to return if it remains in place.
The incision should be little at first; and then cut into that place, and if you feel the bladder, then make the incision deeper according to the quantity that you know is inside the bladder.
And you should know that there are different kinds of bladder fluid: some is small and hard, others are large and sharp, some long and round, and some have edges.
Then you should know how many kinds of bladder fluid there are for each person; for in the water that they drink there is a different kind of fluid.
And if you want to find the source of the fluid, adjust in the virious place and collect it for an hour until it stops flowing; then return to your operation before the bladder is emptied.
And prepare yourself with the instruments that it mentions in the removal of a bladder from a man, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you want to find the source of the fluid, and you know that the exit of the fluid is in the arceria that is cut, then pause with dust over that place, and pour it there with a funnel and tighten it tightly; do not repeat that water, for she will die if you empty her. Then heal the wound.
Then as the sharpness of the pain subsides, you can adjust in place; then return to your operation before the bladder is emptied.
Chapter LXII.
On incision on a hernia.
Hernia is nothing more than an addition of moisture to the white cloth that contains the bow; it is called chiffonade.
And some veils are in the proper pannus that nature has prepared for the opening of the bow, until it is time to cut it, and it is another bow; and the edge is the edge of the genitive between the chiffonade. And it is not water but blood.
And the generation of this hernia is by an injury to the genitive, so that it is discharged from there, and sometimes a hit is made on the genitives.
And this moisture does not have different colors, for the color of it is yellowish or reddish or purplish, or is black and frothy, or is clear and fresh water, and that is what you call.
And the signs by which this addition of water can be known: for if it is in the chiffonade that we have spoken about, then the bulge is round and declining a little towards the length, so that it appears like a figure of a bow, and shows the genitive, since the moisture contains it from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper pannus, then the bulge is round and extends from the opening of the bow, and so one judges that it is another bow.
And if the moisture is between the edge of the genitive and the chiffonade, then let there be a stop to it.
And if you wish to know the color of the moisture in the bulge, then examine the color of the moisture in the middle of its shape; and according to the color that is discharged from it, judge whether it is blood or not.
Then when we come to the cure for it by ironing, then know that you order the patient to drink something hot if water is possible for you, and wet his clothes completely.
Then it should be placed on its back for some little cause, and leave it there for a moment, and then take off the cloth.
Then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and order the minister to follow your lead with his right hand, which extends his arm to one of the two sides of the genitive edge and to the opening of the miracle of the womb.
And let him take a spatula of lead and cut the tendon behind the knee from top to bottom at a depth of one-quarter inch.
And be made the section according to the right method evenly distant from the line that you should take the peel of the tendons, before reaching the white of the ankle in all its extent.
And cut off that, and observe, and keep for this that you do not injure that; and your cutting off from the beginning cut down so that it is suspended with two fingers and gently scrape the cutting off according to the quantity which can be done for you.
Then pierce the ankle bone with a wide piercing, and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the section with nails, and extend the ankle bone at its ends; and do not touch the tendon behind the knee in its entirety, and cut off the ankle in that way which is to you possible. And cut off that with its entirety or in pieces, and most importantly his little bone, for if you do not examine the cutting of him, it is not sure that the water does not return.
But if you take the bone of him from that side of his tendon in the hour of your operation, then when you have finished the cutting off of the ankle bone, return it inside, and then join together the two lips of the tendon behind the knee with sutures, and then heal those too as others within so that it is healed.
And if you see that the bone is corrupted by another illness, then know that you should clean up the vessels which are hanging from the suspension, and extract the bone, and then heal it with water which I have said.
But if the water is gathered in two parts, then know that they are hernias; therefore cut off that part according to what you have made in the other likewise; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
And then you clean up the wound, and immerse it in oil or rose water; and place another cloth on the inside which you have dipped in vinegar and oil, and spread out that over the two tendons and the wonder of the belly; and place folded cloths and powders, and lay those on according to this form:
And then place two cloths and be humped with wool according to this form; and be put on the extremities which are pressed by a belt or by wet wool, and be gathered together under the corset of the braies, and one extremity take between the thighs within so that it is joined with the other, and the second extremity take at the part of the crotch, and two extremities take between two cushions and two extremities take over two legs, and all tightened be placed in the corset of the braies.
And some of these hernias are treated by artificial cauterization instead of cutting; and it is because you take cauterization with a sharp knife and cut off the tendon behind the knee, and burn according to what we have told you so that the white ankle bone containing the water is uncovered, and then you take cauterization according to this form: And it is put together in the Greek letter.
And then pierce the ankle bone, and it is burned so that all the moisture goes out.
And then extend the ankle bone with nails, and scrape it with a sharp cauterizing knife; and cut off that according to what you can do so that you remove all of it; and keep for the fire which the knife does not touch.
And know that this operation is more safe and further away from the flow of blood, and better than an operation by cutting off.
But if you have an opposition to blood, then know that you should cure what is opposite for you with this remedy which is said to be used:
But if the patient is a little bit sick and does not expect the second operation because of its horrible appearance, then administer perforation according to what I have told you; and when it is confirmed that he has water, through water which we have said of signs, that this hernia is watery.
And then know that you should put the patient on a high table; then pierce the swelling in the lower part of it with a lead spatula, and place the piercing according to the length of the body.
And be the wide opening so that all the water is gone.
And then place over the area a cloth and leave it there so that the water runs out. And then heal him so that the plague is healed.
But if the opposite is to the flow of water in that hour, then you pierce it: and if there is no water done but only by the white pannicle on the opening of the plague which causes the flow of water, then know that you put into the plague with a small or an instrument out of which the water comes; or adjust in the place of the plague a little.
And know that the water returns and is gathered after two months or a year; and if it is gathered, then pierce according to that method which I have said, for the disease will last its days.
Chapter LXXXIII.
On Surgery on Cyst Hernias and Their Treatment.
Know that in the surgery on this hernia is a lost cause to the pernicious conditions; but it is seen that the dismissal of it is safe and is saved by it.
And I have remembered the surgery on those and the spices of the swellings.
So, say that the swelling arises in the bodies of those whose tendons are connected and it is caused by water for certain causes: or by the flow of water which is gathered in the tendons, or by impact.
And it is the color of the swelling according to the color of the body, and does not change in pain, and the swelling is hard.
And the swelling is very large which is lapified, whose color is dark, and does not feel to it.
And some of them are caused by the tension of the muscles, and by the swelling of those which is already felt the reminder of it, or by the swelling of veins.
But water which is caused by the tension of the muscles is recognized by the disappearance of the swelling when you squeeze that with your fingers; and do not know that you touch it.
But that which is caused by the swelling of veins does not disappear from it for any cause when you squeeze with your fingers.
And it is possible that on this species be made the section and on the other flesh; and it is because you cut off the tendon behind the knee, and extract all of the ankle bone from its cavity, and untie the ligaments which are hanging from the suspension, and join them together, and cut off those more than you untie.
So if the ankle bone is already joined with those parts of the flesh which are solid, then know that you extract the ankle bone and cut off that.
And if there is an adhesion within any cause of the ankle bone, or between those which are between the veins, then know that you untie all that adhesion and cut off that with a round incision.
But if there is a birthmark in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then know that you cut off all that which belongs to it, and extract the ankle bone as we have said.
So when your operation is completed, then fill the plague with sheep's milk infused with rose water and oil; and then heal that with other cures so that it is healed.
Chapter .lxiv.
Of the treatment of hernia, which is of vitriolic nature.
There is an inflammation wrapped in a wrapper resembling a sprig that softens the testicles, and makes difficult exercise and walking on the patient's back.
And in the treatment of this disease it is by fear of which the following remedy is remembered.
However, let them say operation on that second which I have first spoken of.
And I say that you shall make the patient lie on a raised bed; and fasten the suspenders of the testicles to the sartors that are tied to the pole; and let others serve who can reach them by way of extension; and place those who cannot reach by extension under the pole.
And cut with a sharp knife across in two the testicles from side to side, where they are covered by the scrotum.
And cut off entirely all that has been said above in regard to the arteries which are in the temples.
And fasten in those a needle which is twice as thick, and tie the first of the places where the vitriolic occurs, and tie the other opposite to that one. And cut those in the middle place by a right angle according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered there of the foul and corrupted humors.
And cure the plague with a remedy for other plagues in which you wish to heal that they may fall the vessels of which you have burned one of the two testicles, for it is not bad for this humor.
May it happen that all the vessels are destroyed, or that the testicles are cut off by the cutting off of the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they rot, or that they cease to be nourished by them.
Chapter .lxv.
Of the treatment of intra-abdominal hernia.
The arrival of this hernia is by incision which passes through the navel extended over the belly from side to side of the navel, so that in case of a break in any of the intestines, it goes into one of them.
And this rupture is either of the navel or of an extension thereof, and it occurs for various reasons: either by percussion, or by sounding, or by a cry, or by elevation for some difficult cause, or by resemblance.
The sign of this is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and not suddenly, and is an inflammation within the navel, pressing upon the intestine by its extension, for the navel compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is that it occurs by incision of the navel, for at the beginning a violent pain occurs suddenly; and is an inflammation of various parts near the navel, and the body bends itself forward from side to side of the navel.
And in some cases the cloth is forgotten by the intestine, and this hernia is called intra-abdominal.
And in some cases the intestine swells, and in others a hole is made in it, and here it is retained, and is a great harm to the patient; and sometimes bad and great pain occurs when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of the causes of this disease by fear, so that one should avoid the injury in that place.
And the way of operating on that is that you command the patient to pull back his intestine to its cavity if it obeys your return, and place it between your hands, and raise the feet of the patient.
And cut the string of the testicles at their base, and cut all that is above it by length; and fasten in two places a needle which you will use to pierce the scrotum according to how large the incision should be made.
And if the incision according to the quantity that it is possible for you that it has been forgotten by that one.
And cut off all those parts which are left of the string of the testicles, within which is discovered the navel, a white hard part in each place.
Then you shall cut off the testicle, which is between the navel, a part that is left of the string of the testicles, and between the navel, and free from the attachment that is in the back of the navel.
And cut the string of the testicles at their ends, and extend the navel in its length on your left side, and raise the testicle at the part of the incision; and command the minister to extend that one on top, and you dissolve the attachment that is behind with a complete solution.
And search among the testicles which are not covered by the hard navel that there is no cause of the buddle being wrapped in it. May it happen to you if there is any cause, then put that one in your belly from below.
And cut in the place where the string of the testicles is cut by incision, and let it bleed; and if there is any pain or swelling in that place, then do not cut it further.
And give a submerging of lana in oil, and pause in the plague; and give the thread that we have recommended (and sometimes the navel is cauterized, which we said above the incision, because motas occur there) and leave the thread inside it so that it falls.
May it be delayed if it is wet, then prepare it with oil and pause on top of that one so that it falls according to what we have said.
And cure the plague with another remedy for other plagues in which you wish to heal that they be healed.
Chapter .lxi.
Of the wind hernia.
There is nothing to be done for this hernia in terms of treatment, because it is not seen to have been caused by anything.
And the first say that it is done in this way as we have recommended in the hernia which is by virtue of the navel; which is to say, cut off the navel above the incision with ease, and dry up in the middle place where the inflammation occurs with ease, so that the vessels fall.
And cure the plague as we have said within it to be healed.
Chapter .lxxi.
Of the distention that occurs in the intestines.
Some veiled women broke out in rashes on their arms, as I said before, and it spread from there.
And do not give them to the genitals; and if you do, it is little; and return in all haste.
Maybe if the time is prolonged I will have it, it is a deep wound in the hip that should be made into the hip; and this happens to the extension of the hip, and appropriately it softens up the place, it becomes pustular and it spreads out.
And the cure for him is as follows, before the story of him.
And some veiled women are cured by felling their legs between your two legs, and appropriately they dry up the place of the rash with a section according to the quantity of three times.
And appropriately he tightens the hip that is lower than the thigh inside so that it is uncovered.
Then take the rope and place it on the prominent place of the hip, and place it on the navel with a knot.
Then cut the two prominent places at the end of the rope of the hip, and adjust one to the other with a stitch.
Then cut off the end of the rope, and do not insert it into the hip at all, nor spread out the belly, nor any other cause as I have told you before in the cure for an intestinal hernia.
And that cure is appropriate for the blisters, and when you insert the needles, clean those and restore the blister inside so that it is not hardened; because the hip contracts and the prominence of rupture does not become adjusted.
The cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Chapter 68.
Of Softening of the Thighs.
In some men the thighs are softened by water, because the flesh between them is softened, and it is against the rule.
Then it is necessary for the one who is asked in the cure of him that he lie down on his side, and insert all the thigh that is softened over the natural thigh; and appropriately he adjusts two lips to the stitch.
And if you want, cut off the superfluity of the softened thigh at three or four places with a firm stitch.
Then cut between the stitches, and appropriately he cures all other blisters inside so that they are healed and the needles fall out.
Chapter 69.
Of Castration.
You should know that castration in our law is prohibited, except for a reason that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it unless by two ways, of which one is so that he is in the science of the doctor when he is questioned about that, which knows the cure for him on whom it happens; and the other way is that we need to castrate other animals for our benefit with those, as in the case of rams, ewes, pigs, and similar creatures.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by cutting off from the front, or by cutting open to the side with a section.
And in that which is done by cutting off from the front, the way of the operation is that we make the beast swim tail-first so that its genitals are softened and become limp and hang down. Then take those with your hand inside so that they are relaxed and do not appear by touch.
And in castration by cutting open and sectioning it is done, that you have the beast, and press the thigh of his testicles with your left hand.
Then take the suspenders, and place them on each side with a section so that two sides process.
And appropriately you insert those before each excoriation. And do not leave on any of the hip any cause, but rather the subtle hip that is over the veins.
This way of castration is better, because it cuts off from the front, so that no cause remains in the testicles for the beast to desire to copulate.
Then he cures the blister before it is healed.
Chapter 70.
Of the Cure for Hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is due to two ways: the first is because it appears that the space in the thigh is between two testicles, as a woman's figure is formed because of a cunt; and the second way is that it appears that there are testicles in front of the belly, as a woman's breasts.
Some of those men have urine running from their thigh, which is between the testicles.
In women there is one species: and it is that the cunt of the woman over the penis is like two testicles in man a little bit small to the separation from the forepine, as the cunt of man and two testicles.
The cure is of three species: of the two men and of one species of women. And it is because you cut those muscles that are adjusted inside so that the smell of that one is gone, and appropriately he cures those with the cure for other blisters.
In the second species of men from which you get urine that is in the thigh, it is not a cure or an operation.
Chapter 81.
Of Piercing and of Flesh that Is Prominent by Causes of Women.
A strong piercing is adjusted because of natural causes before it is stretched and it is made to fall back with the rule; and some veiled women are enlarged in some women so much that they are spread out by doing what men do, and they come within the reach of intercourse.
Then take the superfluity of piercing with your hand or with an iron and place it on.
And do not end in incision, more in the hair on the head, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
Then he cures that one with the cure for blisters inside so that it is healed.
And hidden meat is meat that is in the belly of a mother, and it fills that one, and it is strong so that it is separated by doing what we do with piercing, and appropriately we insert those when we pierce, and cure that one before it is healed.
Chapter 72.
Of the Cure for Herpes.
Herpes is that the cunt of the woman is not pierced, or is a small hole. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is because of bad weather that has preceded, and that one is made by unadjusted meat or a hip that is subtle or tight.
And it is made by the hair on the mother's head, or her arms, or the lower part of her belly, or the upper part of her belly, and it is prohibited to cut and to engage in sex and to have children, and it is strong that it is prohibited to menstruate.
The knowledge of that one is made by looking at the moon, if the obstruction appears, probably; but if it does not appear, then you seek it out with the fingers or with the rope.
And if obstruction is by a hip that is subtle, and it is closer to the two lips, then you cut and break that one.
And it is because you pause on the two lips with your fingers, and appropriately you put the rope between the two sides.
And the woman be on her back, her legs extended, and so extend the two lips with force before that small piece is broken and the oppression is opened.
Then take wool and pour oil on it and place it on the spot, and make a cut into it so that the spot does not close.
But if the piece is thick and fat, then cover that which you cut with a sponge of lime or with a leaf of mint.
But if the oppression is caused by flesh, then suspend that with oil, and cut it.
And if the medicines which cause a cessation of flowing blood from wounds, are not effective, then add to them a little lead and copper, and adjust it with white wine.
Then administer a wide lead catheter so that the pain does not close up badly.
And hold it in place for several days and administer liquid lead.
Then he is cured with the other cure of consolidation, so that he may be healed.
And sometimes in the mother’s pregnancy of other animals, then cut according to this way. But if it is for a toothache in the wisdom teeth which are not made in any way contrary to putting something in a certain way.
Chapter LXXIII.
Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids and of Thigh and of Red Swelling that Occurs in the Vagina of Women.
Hemorrhoids such as those of small veins that occur within those orifices from which blood constantly flows; and when they are old hemorrhoids, then they are painful.
And I have said in the division the spices of those and their signs, and direct them as follows those which I receive cure and those which I do not receive cure.
Then say that hemorrhoids and thigh when in the mother’s womb do not appear on the feel, then in those is not made cure by putting anything.
But those which are in the orifice of the mother over whose feel appears to be cured.
Then cover the woman with a cold cloth and extend those with forceps or a sharp razor, and cut them with the razor.
Then sprinkle on those of the dust from one of the powders that you cut into a wound, thus with mint and similar to those.
Then weigh the feet for an hour, then place them in boiling water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then boil them in a decoction of sumac and pepper grains and of herbs.
Then take wheat flour and make a paste with honey and vinegar, and put it on the feet with water.
And if the blood is dried up, then boil it; and if not, then join them with two glasses, and make incisions in the breasts.
Then take wool and immerse them in juice of coriander or of arnica or of grape must, and put it on the area; then heal the area within that it is healed.
And heal that within that it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
Of the Perforation of Nerve in the Mother.
Small veins sometimes occur in the mother, thus with toothache and pain, swelling, and itching, and blisters, and ulcers, and fever, and thigh, and other small veins. And I have said these diseases and the spices of those and their signs, and the cures of them in the division.
Then say in this treatise of the perforation cure which you make in the mother when it is of the perforations that you cut, and if you wish to know how the operation of them is made by putting anything.
Then consider if the pain of the toothache in its beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever, and sometimes that it becomes hard, and if you cut into that with a perforation, then heal that with water which helps within that the severity of those changes stops.
Then when you cut the woman on a table which has two tables; and place her on her back with her legs extended, and pause her hands below her belly, and open her legs from her thighs, and pour water there convenient.
Then the woman follows her to the right side and administer the instrument with which you cut the orifice of the mother, the shape of which will come in those cases that you will make it appropriate.
And when you wish to administer this instrument that you put it on the right side of the mother’s womb, and with that instrument it enters into the mother’s womb, and all bad things are removed from her womb. But if the instrument is greater than the mother’s womb, then when you pause powder on the texture of the mother’s womb in order that the entry of any instrument into the mother’s womb be prohibited.
Then when you pause the liquid which flows in the instrument on the right side and that the minister holds the instrument and mixes the liquid within that it is suitable for cutting the orifice of the mother.
Then when you feel the excitement, and it is touched with your hand, then cut those off with a pointed cautery.
Then when the pain is relieved, then cover that with a cotton wool dip in olive rosin or olive green in which there is no stringency; and place the cloth on the section of the mother’s womb.
Then cover the mother with a clean white wool cloth dipped in water which is clear and free of wrinkles.
Then he is cured after two days by putting on oil which appears within that it is healed.
Then sometimes the mother is washed and the pain is relieved by a solution of sugar and honey, and dip it in water in which razids of lavender or of herb are long, then return to the oil.
But if the pain is inside the mother’s womb, then when you are prohibited from curing it by putting anything in, then heal that with water which I have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
Of Teaching the Midwives in What Manner the Blemishes on the Body are Healed when they feel according to this figure that is not natural.
The necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes in the beginning of the natural conception by signs of her, and it is that when you see the woman express herself to the left side and desire to smell the air, and above it is extended per se by water which is over it, and she hastens to express the child, then know that this part is the second figure of nature, and the expression of him on her head, and the second one hanging or suspended from the navel.
Then when you see those signs, then the mother’s belly is moved by that the expression of the child is slightly above that when it is over her head, then draw it to her left side, and she is born from those superfluities with good birth.
But that which is the other of this part is not natural and unworthy, for when the child is expressed over its feet and his back is expressed before his head and his feet, and the mother’s hand on her side, or on her neck, then know that it is a female. If his head and hand are not placed in the right position, or if his belly is turned towards him, then he will fall forward on his chest and cannot move his arms, like the figures of a wheel.
A necessary cause is that the midwife be skilled and subtle in all matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
And you shall show all the figures of those, and what use there is in them so that it may be understood by him who looks at it, and that he may stand on it.
When he is placed on his head by natural inclination, and he is violent with the woman, and it is a difficult birth, and sometimes the virtue of him has already failed her, then let the woman lie down, or have someone help her, and pour boiling water on her skin with fennel seeds and oil.
Then the midwife shall put her between the two spinners and a cloth, or cut off that part of her with a sharp knife while it is wet with moisture. And press the woman's belly in so that the baby comes out.
If it does not come out, then cover her with a blanket of wool and a covering of fennel seeds mixed with wool.
Then order him, while she is covered and pressed, to sneeze, and for an hour keep his mouth and nose closed, because the child will soon come out.
And if both of them sneeze at the beginning, then cover her with ease, little by little. If you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a mat and lift her feet up, and then hit the mat against the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall because of the blow.
And if the third does not come out whole and the child is torn from within, then cut it off and pull it out with an iron string, for it will soon come out whole.
When the fetus is on its feet, then push it down on them, and little by little make it stand up, and little by little hold it up, and little by little bring it to life.
But when it is inside the woman's legs, then order him to sneeze with a covering, because if God wills it, he will come out whole.
And if it is not whole when you place him in the water that we have spoken of, then return it little by little until it reaches the second natural figure, for he will soon come out whole if God wills it.
And if it is forbidden to place him in all the water that we have spoken of, then take musk of alma and dissolved gum, and beat them well in a mortar, and pour it on the woman's navel, the lower part of her belly. Then place that knife in boiling water, so that it can cut the umbilical cord.
And when the parts of him are no longer moving, then give him sub-fume of mint and sub-pause to him. And when the sub-fume has lasted an hour, then place him on a mat, and then make him sneeze and open his mouth, and take out the cord from within, and press the lower part of his belly lightly with compression, because the child will soon come out whole.
Of the fetus hanging upside down from one of its feet. He should be lowered into the womb, but if you cannot do that, then lift her up and let her go.
And if she cannot go, then place her on the ground, and hit her with a violent blow, and administer to her the medicines that we have spoken of.
And if the child has come out, then place the woman on a mat, and study how to lower her body, and hold the second child in your hands little by little, and make her sneeze, and order her to squeeze herself little by little until she comes out whole.
Of the child on its back with its legs and feet spread apart, and its head between its mother's legs. Then let the midwife hold the child's head, and then turn it little by little with ease.
And when it is swallowed and when it is ready to come out, then place it in the water that we have spoken of with oil and mucus.
Then order him to move his mouth little by little, and when it is ready to come out, then place the mat on your left side, and press her belly with ease; and make her sneeze with a covering. The exit of the fetus is prepared on its left side.
When the mother's second child appears in this way, consider it, and then you shall place her hand on your leg within so that it is free of moisture.
And if the fetus hangs over its mother' head and foot, then you shall cut it off, so that it is not kept or delayed.
Then place the fetus on the inside parts within so that it is prepared for the birth of the second child, and order the woman to squeeze herself a few times, and let him come out whole if God wills it.
The exit of twins or many children. Know that twins come out separated from each other, and sometimes three or four come out at the same time, but only one child is born alive; and it is an extraordinary event caused by nature, not something that can be controlled.
Count them, for they are multiplied, one after the other, and are separated by a cord from each other; and those that remain outside the womb are not alive, but are dead. And sometimes there is one child in the womb for one mother, and some children are cut off with an knife at the navel of another woman; and sometimes some children come out whole through a birthmark on someone else's navel, because it is not possible to control what happens in nature.
If the child is difficult to bring out and it has come into a strange shape that cannot be controlled by nature, then you shall take care of them as we have spoken of.
And if the midwife is skilled and wise, and works with ease and subtlety, and does not delay it, and creates an image of something that is useful for her salvation.
Remember that it is formed in the womb from embryos and that some are aborted.
Some are made in the mother's womb one, two, three, four, and five, and six, seven, eight, ten, and already it has been verified that a woman gets pregnant with six, and another with ten altogether, which causes great marvel to the glorious wise ones.
And in all this it is clear that if one were to inquire into the science of midwifery, how much greater will be his suffering because of the little knowledge he has about it, and therefore pause until he knows about it.
Chapter .LXVII
On the Extraction of the Foetus When It is Dead.
When you are dealing with a dead fetus, as we have said in the division of medical treatment, and it does not come out on its own, then you must certainly use surgery to get it out, provided that you consider whether the female is of good health and not subject to any accidents for which it would be a waste of life.
Then, when the female is lying down on her back, and her head is inclined downward, and her thighs are raised,
the minister should hold it with two hands or tie it in the lying down position, so that the body does not extend itself during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oil, and with a warm mixture of alfalfa and fenugreek, and with a taste of licorice.
Then you should put these oils and mixtures on the mother's hands, and with ease make her lie down in a comfortable position, and around her navel, so that the nails of the fetus are caught around it.
An appropriate place: then you should consider whether the fetus is prepared for delivery, and if so, place it on its head, and fasten its nails into the hair of its head, or into its neck, or into its mouth, or onto its palate, or leave it with its beard, or onto its collarbone, or onto its ribs, or near its shoulders, or its hips.
Otherwise, if the delivery is to be made on the feet of the child, then in the fifth rib, or in the middle of the ribs.
Then he should hold the nail with his right hand, and place the child's head in that position where it is between the shoulders of the mother, and make an incision there, unless it comes out on its own, until it reaches the cause from which it has come, without difficulty.
Then you should place another nail in its position, or the third, if necessary, so that it is attracted and not extended, according to its nature only.
Thus it will be more pleasant from the very beginning, that the delivery of the child is eased in this way, and not extended in any way, as it should be. And when the child has come out entirely, then you may cut off its umbilical cord.
Then in the water between them where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then consider that the mother should rub some oil there, and put it in a particular way, and turn it over with her hands, so that the water that has been retained comes out.
Then if the child's part has been taken out, consider that the nails are swapped around to this position where it is put first; and do so before all the child has come out.
Otherwise, if the mother's back is exposed before the other one, and it is not possible to reduce that part by the skin's tension, then consider that it should be wrapped up in this way; and extract that part before all of it has come out, and mark that or the joint of the hand.
And so you should make an incision on the other side, and on both feet.
Otherwise, if the child' head is large, or its skin is torn during delivery, or it is caught in the water pipe, then consider that you should put it between the two spine bones and cut off the head, and extract the water by this means, or use an instrument called "round" whose form will be like the forms of the other instruments in the chapter where this is appropriate.
Then it should be made if the child's head is large by nature: and consider that you should mark it with a pencil, or cut it off with a sharp instrument as we have said; and then extract the bones with pliers.
And if the head is delivered and caught by the collarbone, then it should be cut there before extracting the moisture that has been poured into the foot.
Otherwise, if it is not complicated, and is not delivered during sleep, then consider that you should mark it soon as possible after delivery.
And if the child is in the mother's womb, or is in her bladder, then you should pierce it there to extract the moisture that is in it.
Otherwise, if the child is on its mother' legs, then its attraction will be light and its direction to her mouth will also be light.
Otherwise, if the child is caught by nature before it comes out of the mother' belly, then consider that you should wrap it in cloth over your mother' back, and cut open her belly and extract the child therefrom, unless there is moisture coming out from it.
Otherwise, if the other members are still alive and the head is turned around, then consider that the mother puts her left hand; if her mouth is open, then consider that she puts her right hand there, and marks where the child should come out, and throws it into her mouth, and places a nail in its position, or two nails, and inserts it.
And if the mother's mouth is closed by a swelling due to sickness, then consider that it should not be cut there, but rather pour in a stream of warm water. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with water that softens and moistens him.
And if the child is on its mother' side, then consider that it should be cut, if possible; and give it water as we have said in the previous paragraph.
And if water is not possible, then the child should be extracted through the legs, and mark where it comes out.
Then consider that there are no causes within the second one.
Then, when you have finished your work, administer water as we have said in the previous paragraph, for the mother's good health.
And if blood comes out during pregnancy, then consider that you should take a bath in warm water and administer the other treatment.
You have already seen a female in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and another pregnant woman nearby; and the second one gave birth to a live child, while the first one had a dead fetus. Then it happened that a long time ago there was an apoplexy in the womb; and it swelled up until it broke open, and then blood came out.
And you were called to treat him, and you treated him for a long time, but the plague was not consolidated.
Then you continued to treat him with some plasters to relieve his strong attraction, and extracted a bone from him, and passed a few days later, and another bone came out; and you were amazed, for there was not a bone in his womb.
Then you began to think that they belonged to the dead fetus.
Then you cured the plague in him, and extracted some bones from him; the existing female was in her usual dispositions, and I saw her for a long time, and corrected her, giving her a little bit of blood.
Then you did not consider it strange, but rather that there is science and help for those who do not want to listen; the doctor should also be able to help them with a treatment given by
From the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fet.
Form of vertical, at which the mother is opened:
This is the form of sternum in which the free are pegged, at which pegging there are two vertiges on the two extremes of two fists. However this vertice is covered that it is put subtler of sternum, and is made or of ebony or of oak wood.
And it is the length of each fist that there are two dices and margin of both sides that a dice, and the length of each is a palm and half; and in its place of two fists so are two adjustments of this same fists which already they are closed up, of whose the length is the majority of a palm and a little bit less, and the width of each is a die or a little less.
And these two additions are entomes in the mouth of the mother so that it is opened to them when you rotate the two prescribed vertiges.
Other form similar to that more subtle and more light:
Be made of ebony or oak wood according to the appearance of pliers. However in the end of you so two additions also sometimes, and the length of these additions is that a palm, and the width of each one is a die.
And when you want to open the mother, then do so that she is placed on her back with the legs hanging down, making a hole between them. And bring your hand close to the instruments also as you do with pliers according to the quantity that you want of the impression of the mouth of the mother within which the ruler makes so that it is made according to what you want.
The form of vertice that they say the ancients:
Form of impulse at which it is urged the fet:
Form of admiration to which is crushed the head big:
And it is assembled to pliers at which there are teeth in the end, sometimes, and some veiled it is made long also with pliers according to this form, sometimes, at which there are teeth of return on the side that they are incised and crushed. Form of little admiration:
Form of a point with one spine:
Form of a point with two spines:
Form of a staff with two extremes at which the head is cut off:
Form of two staffs long:
All these instruments are made to work, and when many kinds of food they are prepared the artisan, how easy it is for his operation and how more it is useful for men because of its quantity.
And do not open these instruments if they are unnecessary because the necessity of these is not excusable.
Of extraction of the second.
When the second is held, you command to the malady that it holds its ale, and bring your hand close to the mouth of him and his nostrils, and if by this way he sneezes, it is good.
But if not, you take a wave and pierce in the lid a twig and stop it on that herb burn the mouth of the mother, sometimes with pressure and roughness and add chamomile and sage and cassia and thyme. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the wave, and place it on fire.
And bring a tube of cannabise into the mouth of the mother, and place it in that place where the vapor comes out to the cavity of the mother.
And bring that sneezing sometimes with a whistle, and the second is gone quickly forgotten.
But if she still remains, you command to the mother that it submerge her left hand in olive oil or in mixture of mint of marjoram, and bring that into the cup and wants for the second, and with this way found, then take it and extract it little by little according to the method that we have described so that the mother does not hurt herself because of the attraction. And before you go change clothes left-right easily.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed, then we have described the cure with sneezing and with medication of the wave with herbs.
But if not forgotten by all the causes that we have described, then you do not extract it more times according to this method, but bring what is extracted from him with oil and add a little salt, and keep that for some days and dissolve and forget it.
But if it is dried up, it has a bad smell to the head and the stomach, and the mother drinks it; and then bring that is administered by smoking and convenient ways at water.
And some of the Ancients have already been used smoking with nose-cleaner and with dried figs.
Form of an instrument to which the woman is smoked according to the holding of menstrual blood and the second:
Be made of amber or of brass.
And it is stopped the end of a needle and the other end that is wide on the fire, and smoking be stopped over the embers of the fire.
And place that in which it is consumed that smoking and repeat: another.
Of the cure of the bottom of the unpierced child.
Mothern nature, but if it is not pierced, then bring that with water and pierce them subtly and refine them. Then bring to the mother that it pierce her own food, and if not, then pierce that with a staff close to the mouth, and keep that it does not touch the lacert.
And bring that into the cloud of smoke in view and oil; and bring that with vinegar according to which it is cured, and keep that away from the sun.
But if you fear that it will be burned, then bring a tube of cannabise for three days, and stop it when the child wants to pee.
And this has already happened with the burning of the bottom by the consolidation of plague or of an apostema; and then bring that consolidation is cut off, and bring that is cured with water that we have said of the cure and of ash.
Of the cure of the fistulas that we leave behind.
The fistulas that we leave behind in the seat of a child are put less on a knot and grossness that they leave behind near the bottom or in the space of one seat.
It is a fistula or a mole.
And with that knot, it is old and it flows of the moist white or peyerous substance gradually, and some of these fistulas are piercing.
And these that pierce are known for water that is extracted from them because of the exit and the windness; and some times use the marjoram for exit, and strong is extracted from them from vermouth.
And some of these fistulas sometimes enter the space through a piercing into the bladder, and into the meat of the pelvis; and those that pierce enter the junction of the crotch, and enter into the navel of the loin.
And in that which is known as a fistula penetrating into the buttocks and not penetrating, then you put in the little finger called "endicus" in the buttocks, and you insert a small probe of iron into the fistula when it is not blocked.
But if there is a block in that, then you insert a small piece of iron or goat's hair into the opening until you feel the block or hair on your little finger.
And if you do not feel that at all or do not find any cause of discharge nor worms nor vomiting, as I have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then wrap it up for treatment.
And when the fistula enters into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is nothing but urine from that and prohibition for it to go to that place which I will treat so that the place be healed.
But if it enters into the junction of the thighs or into the bone and causes pain in the route of the passage, then the sign of it is that the probe has entered here if it is not blocked within the bone, and causes pain in the route of the passage; and that it often comes out; and that it does not benefit from that medicine, nor is healed by it with a poultice.
And in all those fistulas that penetrate there is no cure at all, and the cure of those is work and futility of medical herbs above which are fermats.
But in that which is not penetrating and old, recovery by iron is hoped for according to what you have advised me, and that which I have already heard and tried.
And it is that the patient lies between your two legs and raises their legs within them, the thighs are inclined towards his belly, and you insert a probe of iron or a point of steel into the fistula if it is blocked, so that you know the place where the block is.
And if that makes the patient turn their back, then cover them so that you do not insert your little finger into his anus.
And if you feel the little finger's pain when it is inserted into the anus, or you feel something between the little finger and that hole or flesh, then you certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for there is no cure in it, as we have said.
But some say that it cures some men quickly.
And of the medicine by which he is expected to recover quickly is that you ignite a subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as it is preceded, and insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it enters through his anus; and then repeat that two or three times within that you know that all those injured and inflamed tissues are tightly closed.
And then that one is cured with calipers wrapped in bandages within that all those tissues which are closed and tightened are healed, and then that one is cured with the medicines that engender and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is not healed by any other cure.
And if the pain enters and does not penetrate into the little finger in the buttocks, and between that and the pain which is slightly flesh or something like a knot, and sometimes the fistula splits until it reaches the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the split, and you shall see if the skin dries up with the split, and through the split, the pain is freed and goes out; and through that pain, he is cured and relieved.
And then make those injured tissues look like a pipe made of the hair of an aurochs, and not that they are split because of some cause.
But if the flow of blood comes between you and your operation when you are wrapping those tissues, then the milk that is made and the less toxic instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterization with fire keeps two clean: it is tightly closed with those tissues; and it removes the dry pain of the skin.
And then that one is cured with calipers wrapped in a bandage or a torn tissue within that place which becomes soft, and then immediately that one is cured from the plague with hard flesh that engenders and consolidates.
And thus medicines are used in which there is strictness and slicing; when it is restored, then it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the muscle of the buttocks and is elongated from its surface, then insert your little finger into the buttocks and feel it out.
And if you feel the pain one hundred times and between you and it is slightly flesh or something like a knot, and it is on the verge of penetration, then do not operate on him in this way but according to a trusted and hopeful path.
That cause is administered in it one of three ways: either that it cauterizes that already mentioned; or that you dry that within which you can reach the cavity so that you can insert your fingers and the cure is possible; and do not cut through it at all so that you do not injure the skin containing the buttocks, and that you come to pass into the patient's own will; and then heal that with water that has healed; or that you lengthen that slightly and make that pus that you dry within; either that you insert a probe of steel into that within which you can reach the cavity so that you can cut through it, and then make an effort to restore all the plague with a section; and if the hole pus does not consolidate, and the fistula opens at the opening of the buttocks, and then let the patient pass water. And some times the fistula is finished according to this way: you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is at the edge of the buttocks' surface with the thread and on the side of the buttocks, then take an attempt to pierce with the sharp end, which is done thus to prepare the wounds according to this form:
and wrap it in five fields or insert it into those; and then insert the probe into the fistula within which you can reach the cavity.
But if it penetrates into the side of the buttocks at its end, then you take out the thread from that already mentioned; and when you have wrapped it in five fields or inserted it into those, then insert the probe into the fistula within which you can reach the cavity.
And then that one is cured and relieved within that it is healed and restored.
But if the hole of the fistula is not penetrating, then make that one penetrate, in any way you prepare it, but do not cut into him so that you do not injure the skin; and then make that one heal within that it be healed.
The shape of the sharp thing used in cutting that is split in two parts: the curved part is a sharp end and the other side is not, so that you do not injure that which is not needed, as it happens sometimes.
Of surgery for hemorrhoids in which there runs blood during the incision of those.
Emorrhoids are of two kinds, either they lie between the buttocks resembling grass or those are full of grease. And they are small or large, and that the blood runs from them at all times and is one, and they are close together, and not outside the buttocks, but in its extremities.
Then those who are in the back of the body and the legs are the first ones to feel the cold: when there is little moisture in them, citric water or a small amount of blood comes out continuously, and depending on the color of the body.
And the treatment for those who are inside the body and the legs is that you order the patient to lie down and press him so that the legs don't burn, and the blood appears. Then you sit down and hang yourself or whatever you have with your nail, and approach those lines on their joints.
But if the nails are not wet with their moisture and softness, then take them with a sharp tool or a bone or a piece of wool, and cut those joints at the roots, and apply some dry ashes on them near the wound, so that they will be at those places instead of cauterizing; or cauterize them as it is described in the chapter about cauterization. And then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the buttocks don't respond to the treatment of leaving them alone, then use a little hook to lift up the patient's buttocks, and wash with that water that is in the buttocks and which responds to leaving them alone slightly.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is that you take those with your nail, or with a small hook, cut them, and then treat those with water that we have described until they are healed.
And if you have to cut a wound, follow this method: take a piece of thread and wind it around the end of a needle, then push that end into the wound, and pull out the other end of the thread onto the surface above, and then insert the needle again into the end of the wound, and wrap the two ends of the thread onto the surface below the needle; and tighten the knot strongly, and then cut off the thread.
And pour that water completely on them, and leave one of them ungermed so that the excess blood runs out from it.
Then place over the buttocks a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and place that cloth on the patient' body and order the patient to lie down. Then leave it until it is cured; and when it falls, treat those with oil or with any other treatment until they are healed.
But these old methods don' t work in this medicine, then you cut those with the tip of a спатум or your fingernail until they are moist and wet, and hold them from drying out by applying something on them that prevents them from drying; and then treat those after they are consolidated.
Then you burn those with a sharp ray of light or a strong wind, so that they become blisters, and then treat those until they are healed.
Know that it is useless to treat damage to the eyes, and it is only good for warning you of approaching danger, and it affects the whole body, but mainly the feet and hands, and through them you can feel pain in other parts of the body.
And then you cut off with scissors or a small hook the part that is affected by this pain, and then treat that spot.
If you want to, cauterize the second one as described in the previous chapter.
But a mole is a small, sharp, round, dry swelling on the surface of the body, and mottled spots appear in children.
The treatment for this is to stretch and cut it, or to treat it with a thread wrapped around it that is tightened. If you want to, cauterize the water as we have described, either by fire or by acute medicine.
But a fever is a small swollen area on the skin that looks like a burn or a rash, and when it touches it feels like a tiny frostbite, and it hurts all over the body.
The treatment for this is to take a pen of feather or a needle, and make it strong, and place that over the swelling so that it contains the circle of the pen around it; and then turn your hand with the pen until you cut through the skin, and place your hand on the back of the neck where the pain is; and then pour out water that has been treated as described above onto the area, and treat it.
If you want to, use water from an iron or an iron rod according to this method:
Let the end of the pen be slightly thinner and less sharp (if it doesn't perforate), wrapped with a thread that keeps it from moving; and when you put it on, make it spin over the skin.
If you want to, cauterize the swelling according to what we have described above in the chapter about cauterization.
Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give a little hook.
Some spots are treated with silver or molten lead or a little iron, and some spots are treated with small instruments, because the ones used for treating small children should be small; and those used for treating older people should be larger, because the tools used for treating adults are usually larger.
The shape of a large hook:
The end of the pen above, in which the thread is tied: and the distance between that end and where the thread is tied is large according to this method; and the distance between the pen and where it is tied is small.
And the tip of the pen below, which is inserted into the buttocks, should be slightly sharp  (if it doesn' t pierce), and turning on a small hook, back and forth, and in one side of the hook there are two turns, and on the other side only one turn, and the thickness of the hook according to the thickness of the lines.
And the bag in which the medicines for the blister are kept should be made of animal or sheep's skin, and the end of the pen should be a palm.
And it should be pierced by two sharp ends, as it is turned over; and if the distance between those ends is large, then the thickness of the pen.
And then insert that pen into the holes with a strong thread that has been strained between two sharp ends, and adjust the bag; and when it is placed on him, make it tight at both ends of the pen: May the quality of cutting those spots be that you fill the bag with medicine, and boil it according to the tolerance level of the patient; and beware of making it too small or too large.
And then place the patient on their back, raise their legs onto a bed or a mattress, and place them at a comfortable distance from the wall; and order the minister to pour out the medicine in a stream over the body while it is being turned over, and then take away the medicine and place the bag of medicine next to him, and press those spots with two fingers firmly, and then cut those spots with scissors: Then remove the cuts and return them to their places.
If the medicine makes him sneeze, let him have as much as he wants; and if it makes him sleep for a long time, it is a sign of death.
May you cure those in the throes of stomach pain and feverish heat with the poultice, then repeat the cauterization until they are healed.
And if there are painful hemorrhoids or blisters in the groin, then use a very fine and sharp cauterizing tool, such as those used to treat children's warts.
For treating wounds.
You have already said and I repeat that for treating wounds, it is necessary to use a sharp tool, and I say again that for treating these with medicines according to the disease.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diverse according to where they are made and according to the place where they occur.
And the causes of the wounds are either due to a fall from a height, or to a cut with a knife, or to a lance, or to a spear, or to an arrow, or similar to those caused by weapons.
And the wounds that occur in the body's parts are either on the head, or on the neck, or on the foot, or on the belly, or on the back, similar to those that affect the members.
And I recommend treating some wounds with a certain method and reasoning, and applying that same approach to other wounds.
And I will begin with the wounds on the head, since the reminder of the formulae will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a fall or a similar cause, and it has already bled profusely, then immediately apply a cold poultice and a head bath, and do not delay in doing so; and extract the thorns from the wound according to the amount of the medicine's virtue if there is no other reason to prohibit the application of a head bath, more so if the wound is due to a small amount.
And be careful with the application of a head bath in opposite cases to the infected wound; and protect the patient from cold, rough clothes, and heavy foods.
And if there is no reason to prohibit anything, then reduce the food and do not bring it close to meat or wine.
And apply a compress of rosewater alone or in wine which is slightly stinging.
And if you are certain that it is a case of acute apotheosis, then apply to the wound, if it is new, the powder which I recommended to use slightly.
And if the air has already changed, then apply a compress of salt water within until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or due to an incision with a knife or similar, and the lips of the patient are not closed by the teeth, then adjust them with the sutures as I recommend for sewing their mouths shut.
And if the wound has already broken through the bone and there is only a small protrusion, then cut it and apply medicines to heal the wound; restore the flesh to its place instead of a cordon, and order the patient to eat only soft foods: cheese and bread, cooked and pureed, until it heals.
And if you suspect that the cordon is腐烂并着肉，不要将其切除，而是用药水浸泡并切开；然后处理好。
And if these wounds are on arteries or veins from which blood may flow, and they cannot be stopped by medicines alone, then inquire about the artery, and if you suspect that it is not severed, then cut it with a blade, or ligature; and if necessity compels you to do something that we have not mentioned, then cauterize until the blood stops.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore, you will apply powder to them because once they have hardened, the air changes their state before applying it.
And the method of making the powder is this: take rosewater in three parts, dragon' water in two parts, and for non-extinct causes in one part; all mixed together and well shaken, and if there is a wound filled with pus, bind it tightly until it heals, and let it coagulate with the dragon' water.
And apply the powder to it with a blade and let it rest, and do not remove it until it has healed; because if there is pus, then applying the medicine to it will not help unless it has hardened.
And never use only one kind of medicine when treating with rosewater and dragon' water.
And perform this operation on large wounds when it is necessary to pause them and let them rest; and only on wounds that are new and have just formed, the air has not changed their state yet.
And if the air has altered them, and especially during summer, do not be concerned about the position of this powder; rather, apply water to them as I mentioned before, and if it is difficult to bind them, then apply a compress of flour and water, well mixed, until they are healed.
And if you have a fracture wound in the bone, which is small, then extract it with your hands.
I will direct the treatment for fractures of the head in what is poisonous.
For treating groin wounds.
And if the wound occurs in the groin, it is not different from head wounds in terms of treatment; and between the wounds of the head when they are simple.
And if the nerves of the groin are incised or arteriovascular, then they should be treated with water which causes mild stinging, like vinegar applied to them; and if there is a node in the nerve, it should be cut so that blood does not flow into it. And do not pause over the wound for any reason that causes pain, because the substance of nerves is painful and the continuation of it is into the brain, which is pus from all the members.
And if it is cured by using light medicines, such as rinsing with lukewarm water, and a small amount of rosewater or no-rosewater, then wash thoroughly with lukewarm water and let it dry naturally; and if there is a painful swelling, then apply minstrelsy to it, that is, rosewater or non-rosewater, and wash with lukewarm water when the swelling becomes soft.
And if the wound is large, then apply sutures, or bind the lips tightly, and treat it with powder until it heals.
And if the wound is deep or occurs in a low place with pus, then pierce it at its most depressed point.
And if the wound has already broken through an artery and there is a continuous flow of blood, then separate it or stop the blood flow with a ligature; or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so with water.
And if the cordons have already been cut and all the veins of the neck are tied up, then adjust the lips of the patient to their place over the throat and tighten them gently; then let it rest for a while, and then treat it with water which causes mild stinging and excitement until it is healed.
And if the wound has already been broken in the bone and is healing on its own, then extract all the pieces you can; and if it is not covered with a cloth, let it rest until it is healed, and separate it from anything that might harm it; and if necessary, clean it.
And if the plague is recent, then powder on that powder which I have told you about. Or if in the plague a fistula is made, then cure that wound from which the memory will come back to the site in its own time.
If it is a stab from a knife or lance and the depth is known, then consider whether there is windiness in the patient's illness; then know that the plague is deadly.
And if there is no depth and the plague is recent, then you should pause in it from the first hour with powder, and do not tighten that which keeps the patient's legs open, so that the plague does not come back to the site and stay within the body; but pause in it with a wet poultice, and take care that two watch over him for the day.
And if the poultice is not with you, then you should pause in the opening of the plague with a wet cloth so that it sucks up what there is of moisture; and have the patient sleep on the plague so that it runs out what is inside it.
Then know that the plague is saved if after three days or more it does not happen to the patient spasms or trembling of the heart or tightness in breathing, and sometimes other good dispositions of him; then know that the plague is healed; and then heal that with sweat and with the other cure within it so that it is healed.
Then know that if the cure of him is excused and has been open for a long time, then know that it has already become a fistula; so heal that with its own capitulum.
And if the plague is by incision of a knife or lance, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then heal that with water that is preceded by stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Then know that if the plague has already gone into the bone and you have already cut those feet apart, then you should twist the plague and draw out those feet, if they are separated. Then if they are not separated, let them be within that the plague may be cured, which is to be taken out of them is pleasant.
And of the other plagues that happen in the other members, the help in the cure is the help of what I have said.
Of the plagues of the belly.
The disposition that happens in the belly is either great or small or middling.
And a small disturbance is difficult by any means, and if you do not protect yourself from the interception of them to their place soon enough, for it will be open and thickened by its instruments so that the instrument of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disturbance is middling, for in that there is not difficulty in reducing the bowel, but it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
Then know that a suture of the belly is in four ways: but two sutures are common to all other plagues of the body.
But two others that belong only to those plagues, but mainly to the plague of the belly.
And I recommend to you each exposure and statement.
Then I say that when the plague is small and there is no cause of the bowel because of it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the disturbance as we have said, or when the bowel is swollen by the cold air.
And then, when it is like that, I say that you should wash it with a damp cloth or sponge in tepid water alone, or that you take it into the squint, cypress, spic and mix with it so that the bowel is within that the swelling is resolved.
And some say that they have found a solution in which there is stiffness, and it is better than tepid water alone to resolve the swelling.
Then when you see that the swelling is resolved, then you should wash the bowel with water in which it is raised and cool, for by water the instrument of it is eased for a few causes.
Then if the intervention of it is not necessary in this cure, then divide the disturbance with a small instrument into which the hemorrhoids are inserted.
Then the first cure is best, when it is proper that there should not be an incision, and to take care not to dry up too much.
Regarding the instrument, say this about its shape:
The one end of it is acute, and the other not acute, and the tip is subtle, and not so much as the edge of a blade is sharp, and its edge is bluntly sharp.
Then when the plague is increased and there is discharge of the bowel, then know that its reduction must be according to the natural shape of it in its own place, if possible above water, for it is better.
Then when the disturbance is great and it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the patient on his back, and pause his legs more than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should place his head higher than his feet.
Then if the disturbance is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should pause your attention and consideration for some time in fire so that the part in which the plague is may be higher than the other.
Then know that you should attend to those who are affected by great plagues and lesser plagues.
Then in the small plagues, prepare water that is at your disposal, and make the minister between your most ready hands, which should have the entire disturbance under its control, and adjust the lips of it, and discover the cause of any suture there that does not belong to another.
This is the common way of suturing: one that you take the needle, or count the needle according to the quantity of the width of the plague; and then leave the extreme end of the disruption of the little finger, and tighten the needle, or another that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the knot, two extremities of the thread that is left between the splits, within which you make the incision pass into that split; and then you have added two extremities of the knot and four orders.
Then leave the needle with double thread on it, and sometimes add two extremities of the knot, and leave the two lips and the plague by addition; and then leave the thickness of the little finger and stop another needle in that, and then bind that one with a thread as you make the first, and do not cease to tie the thread until you have completed all the connection of the plague.
Then let the fine and subtle needles be between them, for the subtle needles pierce with ease the flesh; and the thick ones are a difficult instrument in the knot, and so with water I say that they should be subtle in thickness and grossness.
Then I do not know that the needle is fixed in two extremities of the knot next to each other, so that the flesh is not pierced with ease and the plague does not take root before its consolidation.
And let them not be prolonged in suture so that the plague may not be prohibited from solidifying.
And you will cut the ends of the needles so that they do not remain sticking out of the patient's body over his or her hip; and you shall place over the suture the pulverized dust from all sides, which should hold the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the plague has already solidified.
And these kinds of suture threads with needles should be used in the following way for small wounds, since at least one needle or two should be left inside the wound.
Then the second suture is made: and that you distribute the stitches in four parts, from one end to the other two ends of the stitcher, on a line, with the needle in a small roll wrapped in thinness and thickness.
And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, you will reduce the needle from that end of the stitcher from which it begins, so that the thread retreats from the upper part of the wound, so that the suture is a second stitch on a stitcher on which the threads are tight.
And place between each suture the thickness of half the thread.
And this suture is finished.
And in this suture I found the plague which was caused by a knife wound in the man's abdomen, which had been wounded for twenty-two hours. And I reduced that part from which the blood had flowed out.
And the plague was solidified in the space of fifteen days or so, and he recovered; and it happened that there was a little fever, and it returned to its normal state.
And the other wounds had not been cured; and by a miracle they did not become infected, since I did not treat them with oil, because that part was where oil does not work and does not heal, but I placed over the plague a cotton pad for two days and washed it frequently with water inside until it healed.
Then you made two kinds of suture according to the teaching of the Book of Wisdom:
And that you begin the suture at the end, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
And so, with the needle penetrating into the end and into the middle of all the body, and leaving the tip of the needle at the end on which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from outside to inside in the other end, from inside to outside, through half the body.
And when you have finished this penetration, then you will make another penetration in that part of the body where you inserted the needle; and leave the tip of the needle at the end on which you are working; and make the needle penetrate from outside to inside in the other end, from inside to outside, through half the body.
And make that penetration with your hand, with which you are working, in the middle of the body, in a part where it penetrates from outside to inside, through half the body.
And you will begin from that middle part, and cut it with the knife, and take out the needle from the end that is in the hip, and put it back into the end of the middle part, and take out that needle from the other end that is on the other side; and take out the needle from the end that is in the hip.
And you will make a cut and another cut, and you will make a cut and another cut, until you have made all the cuts according to that model.
And the whole way of suturing is that you stitch the skin in such a way that the stitches are not seen; first, you stitch the end of the hip, and then you leave a small space between the ends of the stitcher, with the needle in a small roll wrapped in thinness and thickness.
Then the second kind of suture, which is called the "Gulia", according to its name and description, should be used; it is recommended that you stitch it in such a way that it does not hurt the patient; and you will apply the end of this one to the other end of the body, and this is done as I have told you.
Then you will take the needle and put it into the hip end of the body again, and make that same penetration in both ends of the stitcher; and then you will turn the needle and make that same penetration from inside to inside, between both ends of the stitcher.
Then you will take those caps off, and make that same penetration in the other end of the body from inside to outside, through both ends of the body; and then you will turn them again, and make a new penetration in the other part of the body, from inside to inside, between two extremities of the middle part.
And this way of suturing is better than the common small suture; it is a suture that I have recalled from my memory.
This is the teaching of Gulia
And this is the teaching of Gulia: A stitch on the belly is fixed with two needles, so that you introduce it in any part with a thread, and begin the suture of those with oil; and make that needle penetrate inside the other end according to the way of suturing those which are coze;
And you should know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the belly, then the suture is more difficult than for other parts of the belly.
And the diagnosis of the plague is a judgment different from that of other plagues.
And the cause is because when you see the recent plague on the body before it changes the air, and you return the intestine and stitch it well; then place over that powder that it turns red.
And if the air has already changed the plague, then place over that powder which is around you in such a way that it does not hurt, and the threads will be solidified hip and side; and then heal those who have been touched by the powder as it is done for other plagues until it is healed.
But if you do not see the medicines, then place over it for two days, because it begins to dry up, and exchange that part from day to day; and teach those who have been touched by the powder in such a way that it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in different arrangements when the plagues are simple.
But if you are afraid that the common plague will spread to the principal members of the body, then place over it a wool bathed in water-soaked oil or rosewater; and leave that wool in the middle of the parts which are between the joints and let them dry it out.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the belly, since those are red, then place over it a black stinging mixture; and more so if the rot has reached the intestine and caused an exit through its cavity.
And you should know that those who have a thick belly are less likely to heal than those who have thin bellies.
And it is difficult to heal because that belly, which is called "gegunu", does not receive the plague that enters into it in all its parts; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it and because of the size of it and because of its proximity to nature's nerves.
But if the powder that you have made from the plague is fine, and you have obtained it recently, then reduce those who are touched by the powder in the same way as you reduce bellies.
If it has been passed the space and it is already made green or black, then you tighten that part where the blood comes out from him, because in the web there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is another of that ligature, and place two extremities of the thread hanging from the part of the web which is фор him, so that above you is relieved the attraction of him to do what is necessary for your hand not to move in a way that can damage the web or hurt him.
Remember the hernia when it happens in the intestine.
When it is disrupted in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it is restored in some men, because I saw him who was stricken by a lance in his belly on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and made a fistula, and he got dry and lost heat and air.
Then you continue with the cure of him already that it is not confident in the cure of him, but choose to make subtle that part which focuses the cure and the place is consolidated.
And you put that I saw the place already consolidated, wait over the patient who has an accident of bad in his belly; and don't give him anything for this accident and he breaks in two pieces taking food and drink, and enter in bath and exercises on their bodies.
And some experienced people have said that when it is an accident of the intestine and it is small, then take care that it is tied according to this way: and it is because you take fromigues of big caps; and then adjust the two lips of the hernia and place a fromigue of those which has the mouth open on the two lips of the hernia; so when you pull on those and tighten his mouth, cut off its head, because it sticks and doesn't dissolve.
Then place another formiga next to the first one, and do not stop making formigas until you have done all the hernia.
Then return that one and tie the hernia; and break those caps which are joined to the intestine when the intestine is cured; and don't cause any damage to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine is held with a small thread which is made from the intestines of an animal because it is sharp; and it is because you take the end of these threads of the intestine, and it is a little bit dried up, and then place the end of that thread on a small hook, wrapped, and then put that hook in needles and cos with him the thread which is made from the intestines of an animal, and reduce that one to its disruption.
This way of tying with formigas is not anything else but another way of confidence and hope.
Then if the hernia is big and wide, mainly because it is a subtile way of suturing with formigas; and it is not a cure of him completely.
Of cure for the hernia and fistula.
Do you know that all the hernias and abscesses are made when they are infected and become pus, and it is not consolidated and gets heat always, and doesn't get cut off; then, in any member, it is called a fistula, and we call that one of the zucham.
And the fistula according to truth is a nodacio feutrada and hard that it is white to which it is concave so when it is concave of pain from above; and for this reason it is called a little rice, that is, pain.
It is in men who moisten themselves, which gets heat; and the moisture gets cut off in some hours. Some of this moisture is turned into powder and it is little and thick and subtle.
I have already shown all these causes and pointed out those which are relevant to the cure with medicines in the division.
So that you can know how to cure a fistula which is made by surgery and not by nature.
Do you know that fistulas happen in all members of the body; because some of them reach the veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the bladder, or any other part of the body, or to one of its joints composed by composition so that it comes from the main member and the foot; and some of them cause pain in the close proximity of the main member and similar parts.
And then that one of these fistulas which is according to this way is among the diseases of difficult cure and doesn' t respond to treatment; it is a waste of work and ignorance.
Then if it is one of the fistulas whose depth doesn' t reach those places which are said, and you wait and treat him, and you want to learn about it, then take a knife or a file, and if the fistula goes according to nature, and ask about that one with him.
Then if the fistula is a twistedness, then investigate that one with a small knife of tin because tin rises and bends the web of the body; it is helpful for treating that one.
And if the fistula is very large and ugly, then you cannot do anything about that sign with him.
Then open the opening by closing its holes because the moisture which makes you wet that one will pass through these other openings and run from them.
Then ask very carefully, according to which way you can recognize if there is bone or a nerve; and it is the concave of the fistula which is far away or near, and it is a fistula with only holes and it is over that one completely with all your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of pain comes from your compression on him in the place, and signs of different causes and accidentz of the abscess.
And then you will see clearly all these causes at a distance; then, regarding the cure according to confidence: and it is because you consider that this fistula appears in a close place or in a far place from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the parts which I have said.
Then you clean the fistula according to what has been said before about its cure; and then take care not to cut off any part of the skin because it is formed there, or from the teeth, or other parts, and cure that one inside which can be healed.
Then if the fistula is very deep, and it is following nature, then return that one in its sheath as much as possible; and then remove all the corrupted flesh from him; and then place sharp medicines wrapped in him, and put those within the concave of the fistula, which has been understood by iron.
And do so at those few spots where the acute medicine corrodes whatever is rotten in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
Then restore that one by applying poultices on those spots from which healthy flesh grows until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this water, then you should cauterize that second one as we have just described.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it should be made known to you, then you should inquire about that second one as we have just described, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member thus far as we have said.
But if the bone is discovered and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you should cut out that part where the corruption is completely located; and then heal that one with this water so that it may be healed.
But if it does not heal and flows so as to form a pus, then you should know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption; and then discover carefully on the second side and precisely examine its cause and clean it completely with water, and then heal that one.
And so if it is healed, then it is good; but if not, then you should know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and then you must go there to discover it carefully.
But if the bone is corrupted little, or if it is within your reach to throw it, then you should throw it with subtle tweezers which must be immersed in water.
But if there are any bones, then you should carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause behind for your strength.
But if you have any difficulty with any causes of moisture, and in their incision there is neither fear nor mistake, then incise those layers or meats if they are here, and free the bones.
But if you have not prepared yourself to cut the bones with your knife, then pause on that water which you can collect, and leave that one within which those bones of meat and layers are, and keep the water which is not solidified, and the section which you have made with your incision so that it may be strong.
In advance, if you are afraid, then pause on the piece immersed in vinegar, or a piece submerged in Egyptian oil, or one of the green poultices, because when those layers will have been cleaned, and the bones are separated from them, and this drawing is pleasant.
But if it is a large bone like the spine or thigh or something similar to those, and that water from which it is corrupted is only on one side of it, then cut out that one completely behind where there is darkness and corruption, and then heal the wound.
But if that water from which it is corrupted is a great part of it, and the corruption has already reached the bone's marrow, then you should close that one completely at the place where the corruption has reached, and then heal that one where it has been consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you give water to a man in his space so that he pauses on it, and assists you with your operation.
Focus on a young man around thirty years of age, who has pain in his foot, and the separation dedintz is large on the inside of the body where the matter is reaching the foot, and this matter is pus with a great pus, and he does not have an external cause.
And then extend the time with that person for the error of the metges where the pus is increased, and come out with a large amount of pus, and his cure is delayed until the leg has an orifice, and it gets infected everywhere in the body's moisture.
And then his treatment is many times with different methods around two years, and he does not have knowledge of it but only in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the leg of that man and the matter running from those orifices for a great distance; and his whole body was trembling, and its color was yellow.
And then I intervened in one of those orifices and reached the bone.
Then I searched carefully all the orifices, and I found that pus was coming from all parts of the leg.
And then I hid myself and incised on one of the orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, and I removed that corrupted one, and it was already dry and rotten and discolored; and one part of the leg had already been corrupted where it had penetrated into the shin.
And then I held water which I had discovered and prepared the bone that had been uncovered.
I knew that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had removed and dried up, and I had already thrown it away.
Then I resumed the healing of the wound with solidifying medicine for a long time, and it was not solidified.
Then I returned and discovered on the bone second time where the first discovery had been made, and I continued to remove that corruption with the bone.
And then I held water which had appeared after that corruption, and then I began to heal and restore it, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered another place where it had not been cut completely and carefully incised the small bone piece by piece and resumed the healing of it, and it was partially healed when I cut it around a palm's distance, and I removed its marrow, and then I resumed its healing with medicine, and it was fully healed and cured.
And no need for repetition in the operation of him and cutting him except by the disposition of his ease and because of his lack of tolerance and fear of death because it occurs at all times due to excessive vomiting of bad seizures.
And so it is cured completely, and there is nothing in the place of hard bone; and its goodness returns to it; and it remains in its dispositions, and does not cause any contradiction in walking or in any other cause.
But if there is an eminent bone in the body already broken, then you should cover that one second time with this method: and it is that you hold the layer of wool and pull that one at its extremities, and command someone to stretch that one; and pause that layer of wool from the first layer; and then place that layer on the flesh which is separated from the bone, and stretch the extremities of that one so that you can cut the flesh where it is separated, and you discover the flesh on the place where you want to cut it, so that the cutter does not cut the flesh.
Then hold the bone firmly or place it on a table carefully, because when you make water, it is not prohibited to cut the rotten flesh.
And then hold the cutting on that place which is slightly corrupted, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and force the cutting of another part.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, then cut one part after another continuously, and the corruption is in some place or another part, then you should discover all the meat; and then hold it firmly, and cut that one from the first part where there is corruption until it reaches the other part.
And be the cutting on the place of corruption a little, as we have said.
But if the corruption is in the joint, then incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if from the corruption it is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the reason but ingenious.
And if corruption is in the chest of the hand or the foot, it is difficult; nevertheless, consider that you inquire about the corruption in which way it appears to you, and cut off what is necessary, and mend it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and if it is not opposite to your blood vessels or nerves.
And you know what incisions are made and the saws to cut these bones are very much according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and subtility and size and smallness, and hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for all kinds of operations suitable instruments for that operation.
And you know that this operation means for you about the kind of instrument which you need; but you are a great study and long and knowing of the ways of this art, and witnesses of the ways of ailments, since indeed you have already for your own injuries experienced what is convenient for them to all instruments in all sorts of illnesses.
And I give you here at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you shall employ in your prohibition which you will experience on others. Form of saw:
Other form of saw:
Other large form of saw:
Form of chisel: The tip of this chisel is according to the shape of a star-shaped claw, and the points of it are according to the shape of the points of a star.
And they do not work except that you should cut off the tips of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Form of smaller razors:
Form of broader razors:
Other form of saw made with care: it is made with a sharp edge and the iron of it is sharp, and its member is a knife blade made with care. Form of leather:
Form of razors in which there is a concave shape:
Other form of thinner razors:
Other form of razor with an extremely curved end:
Form of small razors resembling a tentacle:
Other smaller form of incisor:
Form of another incisor; resembling a chisel, and its end is sharp, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Form of saw which corresponds to the ratio of the bone-piercing hole:
Its end is triangular and has an acute tip.
It is made of Indian steel, and resembling that all causes which we have said of razors and incisors and saws.
Of the extremities of incision and the locking of the bones.
The extremities can be cut either by intrinsic cause or by extrinsic cause, and if you treat that corruption with those medicines which confer cure, and the cure does not succeed, then consider that you cut off that member within this water which removes the corruption, so that the malice is removed from the limb by a greater disservice.
And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member is cut off within, so that its blackness be removed before it is burned, or it is burned, or it is removed by the blackening of all the body; and therefore you cut off that member.
And it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes, as of a scorpion or of a snake or of a bat or of a weasel and in similitude.
And if the corruption or percussion is at the end of it, then you cut off that same and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the hand.
And if you come to the fire, then you cut off that part which comes from the tip of the fire, and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the fire of the arm.
And if you cut off that same, then you cut off the arm in the junction.
And if another corruption passes and turns around the junction, then it is the death of the malice; and a quantity of virtue is administered in that cure.
And if corruption appears at the end of it, then you cut off that same within one of these.
And if you take the whole foot, then you cut off all the foot. May it cause pain within the leg, then you cut off the calf within the junction of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already spread to the leg, then it is not necessary but destruction, and let the malice die.
And the way of cutting off a member or sawing it is that you strengthen your joint in the joining part, and another joint on the place which you wish to cut off, and extend the ministering joint to the joining parts, and extend another joint above them; and you separate the meat which is between two joints, and it is cut off.
And if it be not made to touch the place to which you wish to cut it, and if it comes to the malice's injury according to a just measure, and put on it a poultice of water.
And if you come to the flow of blood when you work, then you cauterize that place carefully, or apply some dust on it which compresses the blood; and return to your medicine until it is completed.
And cut off a member that is infected with a strong joint, and care for that place in which it is healed.
I recommend to you that you go to a man in his foot, this accident which you and I have told about, which is how it happened that he was burned by the blackness in his foot from the fire-making.
And that corruption first came into his calf within, which tended all his foot.
And then that man prepared himself by adding to his medicine more than he was able, so that the cure came upon him with speed and removed from it the pain and the burning of it; and he cut off that foot within the junction, and burned it.
A long time ago, corruption came into his hand in the tip of the arm which is injured.
And then I went to him, and so I pierced it with water which was applied upon his hand of the medicine, according to the proportion which I had determined for that purpose by considering the change in his condition; and the piercing of the water did not affect the superabundance, but began to work on his body; and the superabundance ceased not affecting him, but began to act on his arm.
And he called me to cut off his hand, and I did not wish to apply water with the intention of stopping that abundance, but I decided to cut off his hand directly; for the virtue of the malice was upon destruction.
And then he left me and returned to his own country; but I asked him, that man prepared himself, and I cut off all his hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added to this narrative except that it is helpful for you who understand it; and according to which it will be understood, and in what way it should be interpreted.
Of cure and the quality of a poultice with medicines.
When there is an abscess on some corpulent member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it connects with the sanium (purulent fluid), then it is ruptured and perforated, and the sanium is discharged from it; then it is kept open for as long as one wishes, like a vessel, and the string that opens it up is tied with a thin cloth, and does not come to the last corruption, nor does it penetrate into the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called sinus, and not fistula.
But if the space is prolonged until the corruption reaches a member, then it is called a fistula and not a abscess.
And the cure for it is that you pierce all that string completely, and most of all when it is thin and made with cloth, and make sure it does not stick to the area because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the string will adhere and that that corruption does not come to the last consequence, and that the string has opened from the front, then you cure it with a rectal clister.
And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the smell that comes out of it is strong, then clisterize it with an Egyptian medicine that is oil and vinegar and honey, and make sure it is placed in a vessel, and put on the fire so that the medicine boils and reaches its depth.
Then take from it the water that is necessary and dissolve the honey and water; and clisterize the medicine in it for two hours.
Then remove that medicine with care; and make water for as many days until the sinus is clean and the blood is gone.
And some vegeations are clisterized with ash water, when this medicine is not present with you; and that you take the ash from the vine, and put it on the water; and then drink it and clisterize it in it so that you are sure that the sinus will stay closed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then clisterize it with honey and water and mix it with honey three times, and clisterize it with honey and water, because honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the vinegar makes the sinus adhere, and most importantly when there is a lot of stinging and dryness.
And when you make water a few times and are sure that the sinus has healed, then clisterize it with water that softens the flesh.
And take a little amount of the astringent oil and dissolve it with rose water and vinegar, or clisterize it with some medicines and other enguents that have the properties that I already mentioned in the treatise on enguents.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow so that the canula of the clister does not reach it, then you increase it little by little, and put a few layers of Egyptian ointment or basil ointment on it so that it is increased.
And if the orifice seems wide, then you add the sutures to the skin around it and put the same amount as before when adding to the canula.
And if the orifice from which the branch runs out is raised above the skin, then dry it in the pus that is below it so that the branch does not run out, because when the branch is constricted at the sinus peak the flesh becomes inflamed.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus up to the pus base according to what you want, then you should pierce the member so that the branch runs out slightly according to your clothes and does not keep any reason for the branch to stay.
But if it is on the sinus orifice, which is kept closed all the time so that water does not get into it and disturb the branch. And so you know if the water that runs out from the branch is little or a lot, or is not digested or undigested.
And when you consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And when your medicine has stayed on the sinus orifice in this way for a while and you see that the matter is attached to it or has become a part of it, then you change the cloth every three days, and when you change the cloth, replace the ointment.
But if the sinus has a soft space with subtle viruses, then do not despair of the adhesion of linen, because the healing takes place, because some people heal more quickly than others and some take longer.
If the sinus does not have a lot of pain for three days, then you know that the sinus is not attached; and if the adhesion of the sinus lasts and causes prolongued conditions, then you adjust the medicines to dryness, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they become dry by adding oil-based ointment, when there is a lot of accumulation of addings.
And the best aftercare is to take a little amount of astringent ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on top of vinegar that has been used as a cure for it, and use that one.
And it is good to do so in that way when there is no branch, astringent ointment, honey when it is thick inside so that it becomes thick, and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them all together and add it to the honey when it is on fire, and tighten it with water over the cloth and tighten that one.
And sometimes they take a long herbal medicine and cut it with celestial lily (and that is the same as celestial lily) and flour from eru and centaurea, and use simple ones or mix them together, grind them and filter them and add them to the honey I mentioned; and do not eat it.
If the sinus is prolonged and has not been healed with this cure, then you know that the infection is in the bone, or it may be in other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with a fistula cure, which is what I mentioned earlier.
Of cure for paronychia and nail scraping and cutting the finger and its section.
Paronychia is an abscess that comes off the nail of the hand or foot, and if it is prolonged and difficult to heal, then it is a small abscess with a deep cut; or it corrodeys the nail root, and most importantly when it corrupts all of it, and most importantly when it breaks into the bone below it so that it smells strongly, and the end of the finger becomes black.
And so, when you have that fever I spoke of in the division, and cannot endure your cure, then cover it up with a layer of iron, and cauterize the wound over it, for cautery is helpful in this illness.
If the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the joints of the joint are already beginning to be affected, they begin to ache and become stiff, then you should make a thin incision on the side of the joint where it hurts, and push that joint forward so that the medicine that burns can touch all of it, until all of it has been cleaned; and then cure that injury with ease.
If the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you should cut into that bone and extract it, for there is no time when that bone is not cured until it has been removed.
And if the rust and corruption have entered into it [the bone], then cut that bone out according to how much of its memory remains, and then cure it with ease until it is healed.
If the joint has been struck or cut, and there is severe pain in it, then at first you should pour [liquid] on the patient, and then dry up the joint with a sharp knife crossed over it, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh next to the joint, for you will cause intense pain in the patient, and this will lead to unnecessary loss of flesh in that place; and then cure that place with water that soothes pain.
And may it fit well, which is born from the flesh of many men, very strong is that flesh, and very strong is it in the bones, or very strong is it in the joint.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in some of the joints that are said. And that which is born in some of those joints of the said things does not do harm, and that which is born in the roots of those things is very strong.
And of those that are born of flesh, the cut is shallow, and it is because you cut that joint with a sharp knife.
And of that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore be careful about avoiding it.
And in that which is born of the things mentioned above, at first you should cut the flesh of it roundly into the bone, and then tie it up with one of those convenient thongs [of leather], and then cure it with water until it is healed.
And the consolidation that happens in those things between their movements or by birth of the man who has it, or by consolidation of plague or by fire, or by resemblance, therefore you should dry up that consolidation so that those things return to their natural shape.
And place them apart from each other, or place a thin layer of lead between them so that they are not consolidated too much, and separate them, or place a thin sheet between them according to how much consolidation there is.
And if by resemblance consolidation happens in some of the things mentioned above on the palm, then you should dry up that consolidation according to how it is prepared and make it fit to the shape of the member.
Of incisions of times, there are varicose veins.
And those are varicose veins, and those thick veins filled with superfluous melancholy fluids that come from the parts of the body, and they enter most into the legs, and primarily into the legs of those who travel or work or carry loads.
Therefore, at first you should administer a purge of black cholera from the body with strong vomiting, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
And the cure of them is according to two ways: one is that it is cut and that blood is drawn from it, and the other way is that the vein is lifted and all of it is extracted.
And the cutting of it is according to this way: immerse at first the leg into cold water from which the large blood has been removed, and then tighten the leg at the hip with a thong, and then cut the vein in one place near the hip bone, and then lift the leg up high on the side opposite the hip bone with a thong, and then dry the vein in one, two, or three places with wide cuts, and then lift up the black blood from the leg at the other end of the vein near the hip bone, and then pour it out, and sometimes extract it all, and that tolerates the virtue of the medicine.
And then let him drink it, and order him to abstain from the foods that generate black cholera.
And repeat the cure by bloodletting when the veins are filled with blood, and then feel the patient.
And the raising of them is according to this way: you should stretch out the leg of the patient, if it can endure, and then immerse it in water, and cut the vein in one place where it is swollen, and then raise up the black blood from the leg at the other end of the vein near the hip bone, and pour it out, and that tolerates the virtue of the medicine.
And then dry up the leg in the right side of the vein by cutting it in the long or back part of it, and then in the lower part of it, or in the upper part of it.
And then open the leg with nails and squeeze out the vein from all parts until it appears, and that is the appearance of it turning black.
And therefore if you let it flow and from the leg there comes white blood, then know that it is healing.
And then place those away from each other so that they are raised and taken out of the leg, and suspend it with an orange tree.
And then dry up another section next to that section by three cuts, and then squeeze out the blood from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
And then lift that up and cut it in the back part where it is to be taken out, and then extract that from the upper section until it appears due to that second cut, and then extract that which comes from that section that is above it.
And pour out that which you extract from the upper section or from all the sections until it is all extracted; and then cut that.
And if you do not obey me in order to extract and lift it up, then introduce a sharp needle into it double and bind that up, or turn the leg inside out and roll it with your hand to all parts until it is turned over. And be careful that it is not cut, for if it is cut, then you will find it difficult to lift that up and it will come back on the patient by that cut.
And when you have taken all of that out, then place it on the spot of the plague where there is water and oil that is red and not red, and cure it with that which heals.
And if the wine has been contracted with a tortuosity in which it is wrapped up into parts, and that is not according to rectitude as we have said above, then you should open that up to all those parts of the tortuosity and places where it is wrapped up, and then suspend that up completely.
And be careful to cut those sections where you do not cut the vein or hurt that one, for it will be difficult to lift up that one, and serve your prudence in that one.
Shape of the incisions made by water:
No is to the wound as it is with the nails nor is of acute extremity so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of gross flexibility lion, for if it were subtle, it would damage the vein by its subtlety; and he has in its superfluous thickness also what we have said.
Of the extraction of a vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on soft lands also as the Atenegy in land of Arabs and in lands of India dry and arid of little thickness and where there is no grass or spring.
And it is strong that is generated in other places of the body other than legs on lands.
And its conception is of decay that leaves the sinew also as venoms going in from inside the body snake and vermin and worms conceived between the sinew and the flesh.
And the signal of the coming of it is of this vein that occurs in inflammation violent; and the place is pricked; and then begins the vein to come out from the place of that blister as if it were a root of a plant.
And then take hold of the end and let him know that you have wrapped over that piece of lead of which the weight of one dragon is, within two dragons, and do not notice that and hang the lead from the chest.
And as many blisters as it has of cause to the outside, cover them with lead and do not cut that one. And if it is prolonged, then you cut a part of it and cover it with lead; and do not cut that one which is of root so that it is taken out, for if you cut it then it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes decay and corruption in the place and bad ulceration.
So that it be treated by covering so that is taken out little by little, until it is completely taken out and does not cause any cause in the body.
And of this vein is taken out in some men who are in the length of five palms and those are removed and I have already come to take out one of twenty palms.
And if it is cut at the hour of its medicine, then introduce a sharp instrument into the center of it and perforate that one with a long instrument until all the blood has been evacuated from it, and administer decay of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that one by the cure of ulcers.
And this vein has some blisters when it is moved, and mainly when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes out from every opening, and is taken out from each opening.
And then cure that one also as we have said in the division and at the water which has been said above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called in some lands the bovine disease because it has motes of worms under the skin and it is a poor vermin that is born between the sinew and the flesh, and goes all over the body and breaks out it at the joint and comes out.
And its conception is by decay of some humors also as it occurs vermen and snakes and worms and ascars in the belly.
And it is feared by the malice of it, for when it goes in the body and rises to the head, then it reaches the heart, then it breaks out from it and destroys it, and there are some blisters.
And then when you want to cure that one and extract it, do not do so if it is not possible except by a cut, and tighten it strongly and dry it on it, and then extract it.
And if it is pushed into the flesh and you do not cover it, then you stop cauterization on the place where it lives, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it as we have said.
Perhaps if you see that one has reached the head next to the heart, then tighten it strongly on the forehead with a firm constriction, and then dry it out on it, and then extract it; and guard yourself from generating putrid humors by taking medicines to evacuate them.
Of the section on disease of the nafir.
This disease is called in our land nafir, and it is a painful one that appears in some members, and then is confused from member to member.
And I have already seen that second that I recommend to you. He was called to a woman's home in a village, and I saw its arms and noticed a small swelling on the vein of the arm, and after an hour it seemed to grow smaller so that it did not disappear completely; as if it were living silver running from one place to another.
And then he sat in the pain of that place and held himself there for an hour.
Then he went to the other body part where it reached the other arm.
And then I told him that he should twist himself around the whole body part as I saw it; and it was greatly amazed by the twisting of it and the speed from member to member. And I had already seen that second how to twist the arms as this way, but I have not seen the motions of the limbs that cause pain when they are twisted from member to member. But I did not see it with my own eyes how to twist the arms as this way, but I saw it on the woman.
And you did not consider it to be here because the woman was small, and its arms were revealed, and in this way appeared to the sense that same windiness.
And it is necessary that you do not appear in this way of regret for those who are delighted and have the body full of veins.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels pain, then do not appear in front of him as we have said; then tighten it on it lightly and dry it out on it, and then stop cauterization on the place where it is stopped.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then heal it by exuding the body and expelling windiness, and apply those to the body that are foul-smelling and similar to those of seraphs and those that resemble them.
Of the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are different depending on their shape, and depending on the places of the body in which they strike, because their diversity is that some have large tips, and small ones, and concave, and flat, and those that have three angles, and those to which have tongues; and those that have star shapes.
And the symptoms of the throat are when they strike an arrow through the bone and it passes through it, and is taken out from its center where it is above the neck because it occurs violently as a result of soda and scotomia and dizziness and pain in the arms and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of thought and vomiting of cholera, and it is strongly broken the word and destroyed the voice, and is taken out from the site of the infection as if it were a white pulp and has symptoms like those of a wound.
And so, if these signs appear in you, refrain from treatment or removal of the arrow unless it is necessary.
May the arrow hurt when it enters the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and feel whether it is lodged in a hard place, and not in a soft one; and note whether its movement resembles the movement of the wrist, and its coldness the coldness of the extremities, and its itching and chapping, and fainting fits; and then you will know that death is certain.
And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are a frothy cloud of black sputum from the throat, and vessels near the neck are constricted, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily and ask for air.
And if the arrow enters the skin near the foot, and the pain is close to the small ribs, then a great amount of pain and gasp occurs, and all the member' s muscles become paralyzed.
And if the arrow enters the stomach, then great pain in the belly causes no food to be digested.
And if the arrow enters the belly and gets lodged there, then a rupture of the gut, or intestine, or hernia occurs, and there is no hope for treatment or removal of the arrow.
And if the arrow enters the bladder, and it comes out in urine, and causes some pain outside, and great pain occurs in the belly, then you know that death is certain.
May the other members also be saved in accordance with the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or an artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
I recommend to you that I have seen about these arrows, so that you understand the treatment for them.
Which causes it, because in a man an arrow is shot into the lacrimal duct of his eye at the root of his nose, and I removed it from him on another side, cut off his hair from his ear, and it healed, and did not happen to his eye.
I removed another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in his ear lobe, cut off his eyelid next, and the arrow was hidden, and there was none of it left except a small tip sticking to his earlobe, and it was a sharp arrow of those that the Turks use, with an iron point on it.
And that is the end of the story of the Jew, and did not happen to his eye in any way.
I removed another arrow from a Christian which had struck him in his scalp, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one was cut off at the hairline; and then I hid myself in front of it to protect it, and then I removed it, and healed the Christian.
I removed another arrow from a man which had struck him in his belly, and I thought that he would die of it; and then, since it was not changed in any way after 30 days of treatment with various remedies, I hid myself in front of the arrow and pulled it out, and healed him, and did not happen to him any accident.
I saw a man in whom an arrow had struck him between his legs, and the plague settled on him, and then, after 40 days, I hid myself in front of the arrow which was stuck in the root of his thigh.
I saw a woman to whom an arrow had struck her in the belly, and the plague settled inside her, and it did not change its dispositions with respect to nature, and the woman did not suffer any damage in some of her natural faculties.
I saw another man to whom an arrow had struck his face, and the plague settled on him, and it broke the arrow, not causing any harm to him, and resembling these signs.
I removed the arrow from the Prince of the King which had struck him in his nose, and it had already slipped to the right side slightly, and the entire arrow was hidden.
I was called to treat him for the arrow’s entry within three days.
Then I turned the plague of the arrow slightly to the left side, and then I made an attempt with an intricate test, and did not feel it; but then she felt a sensation in her right ear lobe, and then she realized that that sensation was caused by the tip of the arrow.
I applied an ointment to the place where it was necessary for me to look at the site of the arrow in order to determine its location, and then to treat it; and I gave myself time to think about how to treat it.
And did not happen to the site any accident that the arrow had achieved; and I continued applying the ointment to it for several days, and the plague settled during that time, and it broke out of his nose on the third day after he felt the arrow enter his nose; and then I removed the arrow from him.
Then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the plague for several days, and then, on the third day, I tested it, and turned the tip of the arrow slightly, which was attached to his earlobe with a string.
Then I treated the plague with an intense medicine for several days, and then, after four months, I saw clearly the tip of the arrow; and that was my time to think about how to treat it.
Then the plague got worse and I did not hesitate to use scissors to cut it off, and then I removed it, and then I healed the plague.
The physicians said that the cartilage of his nose was not restored, and I healed it; then the plague settled, and he was healed completely, and there was no damage to him in any way.
I recommend to you the quality of removing some arrows, so that you pause here and take into account what I have said about them, because the signs and definitions of those arrows are not understood by me in narrative form or in writing.
And the artisan learns little by experience, but little by observation; and he who observes what is present here and what is absent there, understands the novel operations and new instruments for removing foreign causes of disease when they occur.
And I say that arrows are not released from the members in which they are stuck, but only for two reasons: or by attraction of the place where they are stuck; or by the opposite of the other side.
And that which is released by its own place is either an arrow entering or a sharp instrument; and both are released from the body.
And if you do not stop immediately when it enters, then be aware that the arrow will stay in your body for several days before you can remove the flesh from around it, and the attraction of it to your body and its exit will cease.
And if it is stuck in the bone and you do not stop immediately, then leave it for several days, and repeat the process of attraction and moisture, and it will be released.
And if you do not stop immediately after a few days, then be aware that you must pass a very fine needle through the course of the arrow in that bone from beginning to end, and then remove it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from feeling, then you will examine that person, and if you feel it, then you will invent some instruments for its extraction.
And if you cannot do it on the patient because of the contraction of the plague and because there is no bone or nerve or vein there, then you will come from the front to the place where it is enlarged and where it can be extracted the arrow.
And if it is lodged in the earlobes which are held, then you will free the flesh in which it is lodged from all sides as much as you can; and invent a way to extract it, if you cannot do it on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the earlobe and its twisting into itself so that it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you will use your hand with forceps at all times so that it obeys; and be careful to the last detail so that the arrow does not break and that its extraction is difficult and its extraction is carried out.
And if you cannot do it yourself, then leave it for a few days so that the parts that are in its path can heal, and repeat it because when it is relieved. But if you have an opposite flow of blood, then you will administer to him what I said about the cure in its own chapter.
And keep your virtue from cutting a vein or a nerve or a string, and administer to him at all possible ways of the extraction of the arrow; and do it with ease and calmness and delay and secrecy as I have said and you remember.
And so that the arrow is opposed so that the patient is according to the figure according to which the place of the arrow in him should be according to, for it is more convenient. But if that is not possible for you, then you will administer to him what is possible for you by figures.
But if the arrows that come from the opposite side of the body or if you already feel any of the parts of the outside on the inside through the cord near them and make the arrow emerge; then you will cut it off completely; and do the section according to the amount in which the forceps hold it; and throw it away, for it is done lightly at little risk.
But if it is lodged in the bone, then you will twist your hand according to the opposite motion until the arrow enters the bone, and amplify that itself, and extract it.
And if not, leave it for some days, and repeat it within what is burned.
And if the head of the arrow is in that, then you will push it towards him.
But if the head is fallen and you want to administer impact, then you will put it in, if it is deaf, a loud noise so that it enters between the concave part of him on the tip of the arrow, and push it towards him.
But if the arrow is concave, then you will push it with a strong instrument that enters into the arrow, for the arrow is relieved by that.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you will cover all the flesh in which it is with a substance that suits it, if it is possible for you to do so, and cure that with water that suits it.
And if the arrow has entered the foot or the stomach or the bladder or the rib, and it is close to touching so that you touch it with the attempt, and you can cut it off, then cut it off, and if you have trouble with it, then clean it, and cure that where it is sore.
The shape of forceps that arrows are thrown:
The handles of the forceps that are made with serrated blades that are formed when they grasp the arrow so as not to let it go.
And of those are made special threads, large, small and thin, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its weakness, and the width of the plague, and the contraction of it.
and move it with a push so that it enters the concave part of the arrow, and is pushed towards it.
Of bloodletting from veins.
The veins from which the blood is let out are those that commonly bleed. of those that are in the head. And these are the veins that bleed from the head: the six in the forehead, two in the temples that are called temporal, two in the upper lip that are called maxillary, and two in the lower lip that are called mandible; and these are the veins that bleed from the face: those that are above the ear that are called auricular, and those that are below the ear that are called submandibular; and these are the veins that bleed from the neck: the six in the back of the neck that are called dorsal, two in the sides of the neck that are called lateral, and two in the front of the neck that are called carotid; and these are the veins that bleed from the chest: those that are in the breastbone that are called mammarian, and those that are in the lung that are called pulmonary. But the veins that are let out blood in the arms are five. But one of those is a cephalic, and it is called wild lat. It is called by the people "the vein of the head", and deaf, and it is a migrain vein, and it is composed of one ram of the basilic, and another ram of the cephalic; and that one is called by the people "vein of all the body", and the basilic is called when paused on the domestic lat. It is called citillar, and those are called common those who are let out blood in the arms, and it is paused over the fire, and that is where it is let out blood, and is called the one by the people "vein of the stomach"; and it soars over the poutz by a manifest appearance; and the save-child, and that is the vein that is between the two ears, and has two ramps.
And in the foot and the back are three veins: the one of those is that it leaves the curvature of the denil of the wild linen; and the second is sofened, and the place of it leaves the back of the domestic linen; and the sciatic vein, the place of it leaves the back of the wild linen; and on the back are other veins similar to those.
The healing of veins that run close to the ears is due to gentle cold and moist heat and the avoidance of scaring and ulcers on the head.
And the quality of stopping those is according to whether I return to you: it is that I cut off the head of the patient, and I wipe the head of the patient on the occiput in the place of both veins with a broad cloth so that they are well rubbed; then fasten the patient's head with a bandage until both veins appear and the places of their endings under the ears on two places deeply buried from the head; and test it by the third finger, and if you feel the pulse of those by the third finger, here it is not to be tried.
Then take the knife, and that is which pierces, and you put it in the cave where the vein enters until the blood comes out on the bone. Then lift up your hand to the vein and the tendon at their branches and cut the vein with an incisive cut. And be the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers or more of water; and make an incised scar as large as you wish.
Then bind it with poultices and let it rest until it is healed.
And already before the beginning of this book, the incision of those and their cauterization have been described.
More than two veins, which provide blood to the head, is due to ancient emigration, as well as a sudden and evil fever, and frequent headaches and sharp pains in the joints, which are discharged through sweat on the skin.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to whether I return to you: it is that I bind the patient' head with a bandage until both veins appear by the clear pulse and are shown by the third finger, and then you test it by the third finger; and if you feel the pulse of those by the third finger, here it is to be tried.
Then lift up the tendon in order to open the vein until it appears by the third finger, and pierce it with a sharp knife from inside, and lift up the vein above; and cut those in the same way as you have done in the two veins; and make the wound according to the quantity of your need.
Then take off the bandage from the patient' head and place the third finger on the vein for an hour, then place a poultice on it and bind it tightly; and leave that until it is healed.
And already before this reminder has been described, as well as their incision and their attraction at the beginning of this book.
And therefore the healing of the vein of the forehead is due to ancient emigration, as well as a fever, pain and ulcers in the head.
And the quality of bleeding him is according to whether I return to you: it is that the patient' head be bound with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a scissor, whose form is this one.
Then place the pointed end of the scissor on the vein at the top of it and strike it with a hammer or in any other way that you wish, and make the wound run according to the quantity that you want; and then take off the bandage from the patient' head and bind it where it has been cut until it is healed.
And some veiny are opened by bleeding, but it is not known that bleeding is of acute extremity as the others, before its extremeness, but it is opposite to its extremeness; and those are bled according to the transverse direction, for the bone is hard and strong, and would be torn apart if bled in a certain way.
And the healing of two veins that are near the eyelids is due to a fever, pain and swelling in the eyes, as well as a fever, pain and ulcers on the face.
And the quality of bleeding is that the patient' head be bound with a bandage, and then bleed those, and you stand over the patient' head.
And it is bled according to the transverse length a little bit, for in that place there is no flesh; and if bleeding is subtle, its extremeness is broken.
Then make the wound run according to your need as much as you want, and place poultices on them, and bind those tightly by a knot; and then take off those.
And the bleeding of the nose vein is due to an acute fever and a violent pain in the face, as well as a fever and emigration that occur in the face, and mostly when it is ancient.
And the quality of bleeding him is that the patient' head be bound with a bandage, and then take his left hand; and cut off a little blood from his nose, and let it fall into the place on the patient' forehead according to the right direction, for the vein does not appear here, and because the wound begins to run as soon as it starts.
And you hold your hand over the blood little by little and let it run as much as you need; and then take off that bandage, for that wound is healing a little bit.
And the healing of the bleeding of two veins is due to constriction, as well as the beginning of leprosy and many bad diseases and violent pain and corrosive ulcers.
And the quality of bleeding those is that the patient' head be bound with a bandage by a knot; and place the patient on a table; and the surgeon stands over the patient' head, and the patient sits on a chair.
Then cut off the vein at its end with a wide and small bloodletting, and then take the blood as much as is necessary or more than that according to need; and then do the same with the other vein.
Then take off the bandage and bind those veins with a little tightness in order that the patient may not be choked; and leave them within the body because the plague is healed.
And the healing of the bleeding of those veins is due to little blisters, pimples and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks; and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the passageway of breath.
And the quality of bleeding those is that you cut off the patient' nose before you, and bind it with a bandage, and then open his mouth and look at two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the darkness of either one is shown by its darkness, and more so because those veins are small black ones; and then cut each one by an incisive cut.
Then if you have doubt, leave it to me; and do not know which of those is which, then you turn your attention to the larger of those, and to the manifest pustule of those.
Then make the incision of the two veins that are on the lips in front.
And more than two veins that are behind the tongue is due to bleeding from the forehead to pre-focas that are in the mouth, and to the disease of the uvula and diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of bloodletting is that it follows the patient between your breast and sun, and raises his tongue, and watches under the tongue, from one side he draws blood and from the other side draws blood, and the color of each is falling to blackness.
And then start to bleed each one; and be careful that you do not stop your hand in bleeding those, for behind them are arteries.
And your veins that are bled in the thigh are those from which blood usually flows in all men, and the bleeding of them is done according to two methods, either by sticking a blade to the skin slowly or by cutting with a razor, and if it bleeds, this is the way of doing it:
Is the blade to be held several times, and is that the cavity of the leg opens full-fledged, and to those that contain thick blood turn back.
And this bleeding is of small width and very fine end, and leads to the bleeding of veins that contain subtle blood with a subtle citrine color.
May the improvement of bleeding the bazal vein which is one of three veins; because it leaves the blood of the pains that are behind the throat and from there that it severs the feet and the belly.
And the person who bleeds that vein, when he bleeds it, should keep it safe and be careful in the puncturing of the bloodletting, for behind it is an artery; and if he makes a mistake and cuts into the artery with a razor, it will cause a flow of blood, so that it is necessary that no one bleed it with a sharp blade, before bleeding it with a blunt one.
And if the bazal does not appear by a clear sign, then be careful that you do not bleed it and move to the other one, or seek some ram of wheat; or bleed it in the place where the arm ends, for it is clear; and cut it with a razor after bleeding it with a blade.
And if you want to bleed the hand, then be careful in front of the tightness of the arm that touches the place within which you know the location of the wrist, and bring your hand close to it; and then raise the arm and cut the vein with a razor after bleeding it with a blade as mentioned above; and be careful that the blow does not reach a certain place of the artery.
And when you see it with strength, you inflate it in the place that you have touched on the wrist, then this inflation is an inflation of the artery, and thus let it go.
And if the blood flows in bleeding it like a child's cry, and the blood is thin, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and you lie down and pause your hand on it for a long time; and then stop the pause, and if the blood is separated, because separated blood is separated, then you strengthen your arm and let it go.
And keep the patient from moving his hand, and be careful of him not to hurt it for a few days until he is healed.
And if the blood is not separated, and you see that medicine does not help with water, then you cut the artery, if it appears to you; because its end is contracted, and the blood is separated; or that you take a piece of leather, and insert it into the fistula, and pull one half of it, and tighten it over the place of the vein with a knot within the skin and within the dust within the next day.
And if the blood is separated, then it is good; and if not, then heal that hand with water from which the memory of the dust of separation comes out in a flow of blood.
The separation of the blood from him is difficult due to the small place of the fistula and the possibility of hurting the arm.
And the blood that comes from the venous circulation is more beneficial than that which goes from the cerebral circulation and from that which goes to the head, as mentioned above.
And be careful with the person who bleeds him, for behind it is a nerve; and if he makes a mistake in puncturing the bloodletting and cuts the nerve, it will cause stupor, and the recovery of it is difficult, and it does not heal completely; and those nerves appear to you when they are felt; and if they are hidden from some people and are subtle and do not show themselves, then be careful that you do not bleed him in front of them, and avoid the nerve with your hand.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you open it along its length.
The improvement of bleeding the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves the pains of the ears.
And in this specifically, if you want to bleed it with a razor that bleeds it like bleeding with a blade; for it is the safest of all veins, because it does not leave the artery or the nerve behind.
But a strong pain is felt by some people when it is bled for the first time, and it does not show itself on that person.
The first of it is that you should know that bloodletting is not administered unless the health is preserved and in the hope of it and with caution of its occurrence of pains, and that it is done in one of the veins that are in the thigh, which are: cephalic, fetal, and basal; and that it is done at the beginning of spring, at the start of summer, and in winter approaching the feast, when signs appear of fullness.
And it should be done after three hours of that day.
However, bloodletting is administered, and when it leads to convenience and necessity, or in the morning or at night, at any time and for all times.
And it is that it does not bleed before the age of twelve years, and women do not bleed unless they are past the age of seventy years, and those who have already passed the age of sixty years do not bleed.
And if anyone wants to bleed in any way, then he should mark his Buddhas in front of the bloodletting with a leonine clister, so that the veins do not draw excesses in the bloodletting of the Buddhas, which are useless, and do not harm the main members.
And do not bleed the sick person who has a headache and vomiting, or a stomachache, or multiple reasons for sleeping or working or staying awake or eating; all of which break the virtue, either in the body or in animals.
And now consider in subtile way of humors before him if the sun is big, have food and drinks, and medicines if it is possible to him to that.
And now enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit, or exercise for some exercise so that the sun is subtleized.
And pause the bloodletting from him on the foot of the day, so is it 3 hours, then thus have said.
And persevere that the foot of him is guarded in that day of all animal accidents, then if it is anger, fear, and of all bodily accidents, then if it is work and unnecessary pain, and similar to them.
And at his seat let it be present the causes in the use of which commonly men are used to aromatic and odorative and to balms and similar to them according to the quantity of the possibility.
And follow the bloodletter on a cushion that is put or the cushion of him that should be bloodletting.
And now draw his arms, and rub him with the bloodletter two or three times; and now tighten the ligature with a ribbon and wrap that two times.
And be the tightness careful, because the tightness when it is not tightened, or the tightness is to the superfluity, then prohibit of flowing from the sun; or is to the tenderness, and the sun's joints' examination.
And now tighten it, cover that which should be bloodletting rub his hands together between them before the veins are swollen and declared to the feeling.
And now the bloodletter oil unse his bloodletting with a little of oil properly; and now pause his left hand on that vein, leave the place of which he wants the bloodletting, so that the vein runs a little, and the percussion stops because from the veins is the one that disturbs then if the heart runs away deves the bloodletting, and of those is that it is full of ventosity and when pauses the bloodletter on that it is contracted deves the bloodletting, and is discovered the bloodletter; and the bloodletting does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is contracted.
And therefore, for that which the bloodletter is stopped and is sought in all these causes.
And now pause the bloodletting, maybe if the vein is found in a cushion, then do so; and otherwise, return to that place a little, or over it at feast if the place is not found.
And if the place is found or the patient is afraid, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, because the blood will flow strongly after that; nor enter into a bath.
And now return the bloodletting if it likes.
And if the appearance is little and the sun is subtlely, and you are afraid that it does not get the quantity that you want, then return the bloodletting in this second according to rectitude and adjust in the appearance a little, and make that before the place is found or it is apostemated, because the place is apostemated in most men deves few appearances.
Maybe if times that has apostemated already, then do not return over it, because it does not excuse you any cause; and pause on that some part of the oil' fenda, because it strengthens the sun's joints. And is better in this place that oil and that the other oils.
And seemingly administer oil' fenda in all bloodletting when the veins are prohibited from the sun's cors, and make that before that place, because the sun is subtlely and is turned when it is big.
And if in the place of the bloodletting is born a big apostema, because it happens that the appearance of the vein or that of the vein is little, and more often to that which does not run blood but that appearance, or in the appearance of a vein little, then you fawn, and pause on that location sponge infused in water and salt, a little burned, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
And now make that before the appearance of the sun from that vein with the addition of him or another vein.
And if it remains in that place for some days any blackness or greenness, then do not notice it; and if you want to, pause on that cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or any cause of mint juice or of bitterness or similar to it.
And so the appearances of the bloodletting of the base are.
And therefore pause your hand on that, and if you feel that the hand is tender deves your compression on that, then that eminence is bad and evil; and then guard you that you pause over that any cause of water that we have said, because it will flow strongly from the sun' artery.
And make that plaster with the water in which is tightened, so that the place is hardened, and now care that with another cure it is cured before that be healed.
And now extract from him all man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the winning color above the sun according to that appears.
Because if the sun is black, then you leave it to be extracted before that is won; and seemingly if you make the sun big, then you leave it to be extracted before that is subtlely; and seemingly if it is hot, before that is lost the acuteness of it.
And if that is full and strong and has need of the bloodletting of the sun in a cushion, then be made large the bloodletting of the vein and the bloodletting is made long.
And in that which is happy, be made its opposite, and now extract that in two cushions, and that the two be tightened.
And the best that is administered in bloodletting of a vein is that it is the transverse section, not piercing.
And this way of bloodletting saves the flow of the sun and the injury of the nerves, and is most laudable and most saved that bloodletting according to latency and length.
And to that which is used to happen syncope deves the bloodletting, and now cure that before the bloodletting with a little of bread infused in milk of granulas or of simple syrup burned; and extract from him the sun in three cushions or four.
And if it is chilled of composition, then drink before the bloodletting infused in oil of myrrh or in oil of honey flavored with spices that is like to it, or in aromatic oil and similar, or in oil flavored with spice.
And if it happens syncope deves the bloodletting, and is cause of that another sun runs out, then leave that before the bloodletting drink water of meat and infused oil with a little odorant; and use aromatic to the like of it, and keep his feet on that.
And use of the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter of syncope for evacuation.
And who wants to try his arms and dissolve his sun according to the second appearance, leave that of which the bloodletting is by a small evacuation, and its virtue is joyful, then try to dissolve his sun day after day according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
Maybe who wants to try his arms, and get his sun according to the second appearance, and his sun is strong, then make that before the seventh hour or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Maze who want to throw the thread of the corset down should do so in the opposite direction to that from which they descended, for it should happen on the second or third day.
If the corset in which there is a thread already torn and it has grown worse and increased fever, then take off the thread from one side of the body and from the other much quantity and amplified the opening within which takes place syncope, since you have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy; and pause your hand over the wrist of him who wears the corset of the thread, so that he does not die in place of syncope, because of the veining it happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and careless.
And do not do when you want to untie the arm and evacuate the thread second time, since it has already closed the orifices of the vein and it is difficult to remove the thread from the body, that you press firmly on this with vigour and extend it slightly, for it is too bad.
While you are waiting for the phlebotomy to be second; or remain there where the vein is coagulated with the thread; or pause on it with a taraxach (a type of medicine) or sagzenea (not sure what this is), and press slightly on it while the thread comes out.
And if the vein is burst, then leave that one alone and do not touch it until the burst has subsided.
And if necessity forces you to evacuate the thread second time, and there is no excuse for it, then leave that one on that place or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" (brave's cord) is phlebotomized in place of the arm or the leg, because they are not stretched or veined, since it is composed of them.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient puts his hand in cold water until it turns red, and that the vein appears clearly.
Then tighten it on this with a ligature at half strength; and phlebotomize second according to the small transverse, not longitudinally or according to the length.
Then open it widely and do phlebotomy on this at the joint of the hand a little bit.
And if it is forbidden for the thread to flow, then you repeatedly put the hand in cold water and leave the thread run into the water until you achieve your need.
Maze if you were in the summer days, then you are excuse from the repetition of the hand in cold water, and the month is paused the thread in cold water during the winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is more safe than that of all the other veins, because he does not have a pulsating vein or a nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the right arm is made according to the maladies of the neck.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that you tighten the hand with a ligature or with your hand, because you have put it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and clearly shown; and then phlebotomize it transversely; and if you cut it from all sides no one will see it.
And keep your hand away from the phlebotomy, because he does not have the nerves of the naked flesh of the neck.
Then repeatedly put the hand in cold water and leave the thread run into it, because if you do not repeatedly put that one in cold water, the thread will coagulate at the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
And when the thread is extracted according to the amount of necessity, then you pause on the vein oil and salt, so that it does not harden completely; and apparently it seems that you do all right.
Maze the refreshment of the phlebotomy of that arm is that it is made according to the diseases of himself.
And make a phlebotomy on him like this when you have made one on the other.
And the refreshment of the vein sephena with phlebotomy is made according to the diseases that are in the beginning of the year, as those of the mother, and the retention of menstruation, and the diseases of the cheeks and ulcers of the legs and old wounds, and their apparent diseases of the mentioned ones.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient puts his hand in cold water and makes a friction on this until the veins appear clearly; and places over the joint of the hand a thong; and the place of the vein I cut apparently with a knife, and from that one it branches into the face of the hand many times.
And so phlebotomize the top wide or cut the skin apparently with a knife before the addition of him, since it is better and safer.
And if you phlebotomize that one on the face of the hand, then you keep away from the nerves that are under it on the face of the hand, and do phlebotomy according to the transverse, as if you want to cut it.
Then be careful.
Maze if it is forbidden to remove the thread, then you repeatedly put the hand in cold water and leave the thread run into it until it is removed.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first time, then repeat the phlebotomy a little bit, because the place is safe; and do not fear from it, but keep away from the nerves as mentioned before.
And make of the other hand like this when you have made one on this.
And from the sciatic vein, the place apparently mentioned before is cut off from the beginning of the year.
And the refreshment of the phlebotomy of him is made with care when it is done by mistake with a cold cauterizer.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the patient enters into a bath, and walks quickly and tightens his belt on the waist of him from four times in a long and thin string, because it does not appear except by doing so.
And so when it appears, then you phlebotomize that one according to the small circle and the transverse, and it is better; or cut that one with a cutting instrument or dry it by drying it out, because the place of him is safe.
And it is in one man after he has made a small circle, and if you cut that one, and it appears to you in the shape of a letter M, then phlebotomize any part of him, and this is what appears on the two sides of the ear, and the second finger.
And keep away from the nerves, and let the thread run as much as you want.
Then untie the constriction and place over the location of the phlebotomy knot and tighten it slightly, because it is healing slowly.
Of windiness and of the qualities of using those.
Of the windiness of horns, or of earwigs, or of vermin.
The windiness is done according to two ways: the first one is by cutting and removing the thread, and the other one is by windiness of the cutting.
And this windiness that is cutting according to two ways: either it is done with fire or by fire.
And the windiness that is administered according to the cutting and removing of the thread are twelve places on the body, of which one in the middle back is uncutable, and it is the last part of the head; and the second place from the two parts of the neck behind the jawbone on the right side and under the chin; and windiness from two spatulas; and windiness of alohoster; and this is done over the edge of the cloak; and windiness of two lights, and they are of two bras; and windiness of two cavilles; and windiness of two cups.
And if it is necessary to extract the blood from the patient through venesection, it should be done only from the small veins in the flesh, for then the virtue of venesection will not be lost; nor does venesection have to be done while there is fire or heat present in any illness due to the accumulation of fluid within the body.
But if necessity compels venesection for an illness or constantly, we should do it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the place of bloodletting and at any time as needed.
And so, when there are such causes at times, and especially if it is in the third or middle part of the month, then we should order venesection to be done before two or three hours have passed.
And the immediate venesection of the back is that when it presses down on the head and causes water to come out from the ears; but above all, that the whole body be completely evacuated.
This venesection is in the place of phlebotomy of the cerebral.
And it is not good to use blood from a patient who has a cold fever, because it does great harm.
So that we do not use old blood, nor in cases of jaundice or yellow fever.
But to those for whom the venesection is continuous and prolonged, we should order the venesector to pause his hand at the venesection point for a short time, out of fear of causing oblivion.
And venesection with vinegar is in the place of phlebotomy of the femoral vein and the bazillar; and that causes asthma, and contraction of the air passages and their splitting apart, and coughing, and accumulation (of fluid).
So that venesection with vinegar be a little reduced, because if it is paused for a moment, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And venesection with almond water causes accidental pain in the head and eye problems, and migrains, and pre-fever, and pains in the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the bazillar.
So that you order the venesector not to press too much on the venesection point, so that he does not hurt the artery and cause a sudden flow of blood.
And venesection of the jaw causes alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar symptoms to those of other illnesses that originate in the mouth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of elsewhere that is in the two lips.
But venesection that is done on the two spatulas causes caphaine, which is caused by warm fluid.
And venesection of the two internal parts of the mouth causes renewal of the blood from the three veins, since those are drawn from the small veins in the flesh, and those veins are thicker than the other veins within the body so that the attraction can reach the three veins.
And you should order the venesector not to make any cuts, because the place is naked of flesh and has nerves and arteries.
And this venesection causes hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers in the anus, caused by venesection.
So that you order the venesector to make a large incision, because the place deserves it and calls for it; and a sharp blade should be used to cut it, and let it blood if needed during the venesection process.
But small venesections should be made by a clear and evident incision, because they draw the blood from all the body, cause old pains in the lungs and the liver, and the bladder; and they bring on menstruation, and cause diarrhea and constipation; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of two veins, and alhorcoben, and two kavils.
But they quickly destroy all the body and cause syncope in certain people.
And from venesections of alhorcoben, renewal is more beneficial than renewal from venesections of two legs.
And the quality of the position of the venesections is that you should pause the venesection at the beginning and let it flow slowly, and do not prolong the position of the venesections, but rather pause them slightly, and hold them tightly, and let the humors come to their place by gradual arrival. And do not stop or continue it; carry on until you see the place turn red and swell up, and feel the heat of blood.
Then order to let the blood flow slightly, little by little, and consider the disposition of the body.
For a person who has loose skin, you should make a single incision and not stop it, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And order the venesector to increase the incision slightly and let the blood flow easily.
If the blood is thick, then you should make two incisions, because in the first incision the way of subtleization to the blood and its liquidity is opened. But in the second, to the acquired scrutiny of the gross extraction of the blood.
If the blood is very thick, then venesection should be made in the third incision so that it achieves the last one.
And finally, when we want to extract a little blood at a time or a little bit, a single incision is sufficient for us.
If we want to extract a certain amount of blood, make an incision with a sharp blade; and if we know that the blood is thick, then cut it with a wide one.
And the term for incision in which the depth of the cut is just right.
And if the skin of that person is thick, hard, black and the pores are tight, then make the venesections slightly longer, more open and resolute; if it is in summer, then use oil from aloe or violet, or rose water, or chamomile water, or honey; and if it is in winter, then use olive oil, or mint oil, or sage oil, or sage water.
And if the sweat is thick, then use oil that is fragrant, or olive oil, or myrrh oil, or aloe oil, or mint oil, and similar oils.
But if the venesector has large pores, then it is prohibited to use oil, and that the places where the venesections are made should be cleaned with a slightly damp cloth or with cold water from a spring, or with water from a well, or with water from the sea, and similar liquids.
And if the blood is very watery, then clean your venesections with wine or water of pomegranates and mulberries, and similar liquids.
And of that from which the excesses are thick, wash your windows with cold water or with spring water, which is more bitter, or with aniseed infusion, or with chamomile, and their similar.
And where the windows have been washed in advance of bathing; and after having been administered immediately next to the bath for an hour or two, and after having slept with the windows open.
What is it that should be done so as not to cause wound-making during venesection?
And where you consider the beginning: if the wound-maker is coleric and winds over it fresh blood and inflammation, then if it takes cold-causing causes, put in place acrid milks, and endive with vinegar and lettuces, and secant and julep, and their similar.
And pause their food as well with peas, and meat of small birds, and seasoned food, and their similar.
And of that from which the complexion is pale, if it takes honey-water or almond-water infusion with sumac and a mild wine between wheat and nougat; and that to it be commanded that it use little water and eat, and pause its food as well as peas and canabish and pissers and petiz birds and pigeons.
And where, in the day of venesection and flebotomy, the water is more than the food.
And if it is given to some men a kind of wine or medicine with musk, only before venesection or close to it, in order that the main members are comforted and the blood is made thin; and do not take those scratches.
Make the wounds that are to be made by scraping only those that are placed on the feet, and over the joints of the toes, and the navel, for these members do not suffer from scars; but those that are placed under them.
And do not seek it for those but attract the blood of a member, as if scraping wound on foot in the area of flow of the blood from the member of the leg; and use that which is dissolved fresh blood of the member, as if scraping wound over the belly and navel; because that makes the member thin and scarred and increases the pain because it resolves wound.
And it has been placed on the cheeks when it happens in their operation or poison, because by virtue of attracting the strong leech operation, it removes the poison from its place.
And it seems when it is placed on feet and navel with wound-making in those locked up.
These wounds are administered only with water; and some are also administered with fire.
Some wounds are administered full of running water in the areas of the navel.
And use water to fill the wound and make it larger, or water in which herbs have been boiled with water that is convenient.
Form of wound-making administered with fire: the width of the orifice should be double what it is that we have formed; and the amount of the solution is more than a palm; and it should be in the middle of it, in the location where it is in the circuit, most of it, the thread should be small according to the amount that enters it a needle.
It is made from strong wine or orange with large margins, lion, engulfs, and thirds in order that it does not affect the member's own position on it.
And it is made with a strong crossbar of iron or wood, where candle is placed on fire.
And it has been this large wound from that which we have mentioned; and the small one less than that, according to the areas and condition of the one who uses it.
And the wounds of the exhausted and weakened are other than those of young people and large frames.
And the quality of placing this wound with fire on the member is that it extends the fire to a piece of wood in advance of a small candle of wax, and places it in the middle of the crossbar in the place where the wound is, so that the fire be lit around the match, so as not to burn the body of the patient.
And it is placed next to the patient's member, and the thread that we have mentioned above it, until when the wounds are made, we do not feel like holding the thread and boiling it on that thread, then the wound is dissolved.
And light the fire according to its way, and repeat it if you do not feel like holding it.
Make in wound-making that is administered in the area of pain, with water, in which there is no crossbar or thread, and it is not administered except to be filled with water, and placed on the member only.
This is its form: And this wound, how much it is larger, so much the better, so that it receives a large amount of water.
Chapter lxii.
Sanguineous wounds are not administered on limbs but on limbs where it is not possible to place wound-makers, because of their age, or those that are similar to them in appearance; or on a naked limb, when it comes to the thread and needles similar to them.
And the quality of using those that you have found are in clean water of the town.
And they are laid out on the day and night in water of the town, before they get hungry, so that it does not affect any cause in the belly of those who have them; and they are emptied out from the body in the beginning of venesection and wound-making; and the member of the patient is frothed up before it gets red; and they are placed on it.
And so they are filled, and case.
And if possible water of the place by wound-making, it is better to do so later.
Then, if not, wash the place with cold water and put in motion water; and be frothed up and squeezed.
And if it is prolonged the member of the wound, close up with a cloth in water, and pause it there until the residue is removed.
And if the wound is multiplied, then sprinkle on it vitriol tri-salted, or frotch with its similar causes of stinging ones, before the wound is cleaned; or they are placed next to the place where the wound is, most of cooked beans, and they are laid out before the beans adhere to the place, and the wound is cleaned.
And where, if necessary, a repetition of wounds when it can be changed, those who have them.
And if the wounds of sucking are forbidden to be suspended, then it is frothed up the place with blood or a needle in the places where they come from pain, and they are placed next to those, for those who feel some pain immediately afterwards.
And when you want them to fall down, sprinkle on them a little of salt tri-salted, or salt, or ash, and turn it around immediately.
So begins the work of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of a fracture or accident of a joint in the bones.
Oh, child, know that they boast of this chapter the foolish doctors and those who, at any time, do not consider the free ones of the ancients or read a letter of them.
And for this reason the way of life of these scientists in our country is deprived; and I have not been obliged to do any of that at all times well-off from all; and I have not adapted what follows, but only for the length of reading the books of the ancients and study on the understanding of those, before that I extracted the science from them.
Then I approached experiment and study in the length of my middle life.
And I have already described from this in this chapter all that counts the my science and on which is passed the my experiment; because I have freed it from occupation of elaborating; and I have freed it at the end of elaborating; and I have shown it at the end of declaring; and I have formed it in it ideas forms of the sturments that are administered in it, as it is made by addition of declaring, so too I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
First chapter: On the essence of fractures of bones, from which it is necessary to make a premise before we begin to commemorate the broken members and the different cases of one or another. So consider that I say in the proem of this chapter the summas of the speech; and the chapters at the understanding of which it is necessary to the artisan and in station on the truth of those; so it is you and those that are prompt that knew or learned this noble art before others of you.
And therefore I say that when it happens to a certain fracture or dislocation or twist or ground, then you should cover yourself at the beginning with bloodletting or cauterizing those, or any remedy, if it is not prohibited by any cause, so too it is that you have happened to fall, or are in decrepitude, or is time of violent heat, or of violent cold.
And let it be content in its own food of green herbs and of meats of birds and of crabs; and prohibit meats gross and filling if it is of foods and of all food that fills the veins of blood, unless you are secure of apoplexy cauterization, and if you do not fear effusion of material to the member.
Then return the hernia to its primary rule by him.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then you say that the hernia is being cut by foods of nutriment milk and thick and heavy and heavy in which there is viscosity, so too as it is made from flour cooked with water, and rice, and cabbage, and feet, and bellies of cows, and hens, and fresh drink, and thick and similar to those, and at this rule is made coagulatio of fracture lightly and gently and smoothly.
And you know that the bones of three parts when they are in people who are in their first youth and in those who are in decrepitude, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of the members of them.
And yet nature adjusts and applies on the broken bone of all beginning any similar cause to glut in which is thickness that adheres and hardens that within it is conglutinating and linking together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, so too is fire at the beginning, unless by any cause it does not prohibit those from its works.
And for this reason is necessary that you pause the foods of the hernia, foods in which are thickness and viscosity and thickness, so too have we said.
And you know that the varieties of fracture are different according to the variety of the members, as the fracture of the spine bone is different from the fracture of the head bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the leg bone; and similarly all the other members are different among themselves.
And I have won at the remembrance of every variety of fracture, separated in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Motation of a variety of fracture within itself. And the varieties of bone fractures are different within themselves; because it is made fracture arched another that occurs in the stars; and some are made on the right side as well as on the left, so too those of the neck and ears and additions proceed and do not proceed, as when it is made at the time of pain when prepared to write, and a fracture is made by the plague and disruption of the head, and a small fracture fissure.
And every variety is made or torment proper in the restoration of it according to that comes; and at the remembrance of it distinct in its places.
Motation of a symbol of fracture of the bone. And for this is recognized fracture of the bone: it is tortuosity of it, and from that eminence and appearance of it on the feeling, and no of it when you compress that at your hand.
And therefore when it is not in the place of tortuosity that appears nor it is done from this a little touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the hernia does not acquire great pain, then it is not here fracture.
And then, as it is possible that it is tortuosity or a small fissure, on does not say that you compress it at your hand and with the compression of all; so pause on it of the medicines of which you have remembered approach that moment that conveys to the place; and so be straight by strictness subtil.
And you know that the place when it is arched and does not split into two or any other that does not occur in it satagia, with it is remouded all part of its comparison, then you begin your hour to correct it; and if it occurs on it apoplexy cauterization.
And if on it occurs apoplexy cauterization, then leave that for several days within which ceases the apoplexy; and so stuffs that in accordance with each way that you can of levitation and invention.
And you know that the restoration of it and the contraction of it is lighter than the bone on which it occurs satagia.
Then strengthen that in accordance with that comes the remembrance of it.
And if in the bone is satagia, then is necessary extension of that broken member of two parts, if it is a hand or a foot; or at your hand if the member is small; or at two ropes or at one rope and at your hand.
Then be your position at the which you pause that member loc engual according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended of the broken member, then you perceive that you pass those additions in invent; and according to each way that you can put them in their places.
And protect yourself according to your strength so that it does not occur on the hernia by your operation of them or injury; and according to the right power that you apply one bone to another is in accordance with its various forms.
And then, at that hour advantageously you touch that at your hand; and if sometimes there is any other cause, then correct it and stuff it by the quantity of your strength.
And apply violent extension and compression, so too do foolish movements that occur by the eyes occur to apoplexy cauterization by its operation, or to cause contract in the member so too have we seen it per the operation of those.
And the quality of the tightness in the limb is that which I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs are varied in their smallness and their greatness and the shape of those.
And of those that are small also with the hand and the finger and similar to those, then know that the wrapping is of a very thin cloth.
Might those that are large also with the cushion or mat, then know that in them is wrapped all around and tightly, so that the binding all around connects the large limb and such of all parts with tightness that does not intrude into a spot.
And begin, and your extraction of the fluid, pause carefully over the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the limb deserves; and tighten your hand a little by the binding.
And begin to see again at the upper part of the place of the fracture, and tighten your hand that does not press on the site of the fracture. And begin to stretch out the wrapping at the place of the fracture a little bit, and soften the tightness little by little, until you take off from that place a large amount.
And begin to take off another cloth and wrap that covered over the place torn out with the wrapping, and see at the upper part of the place of the fracture; and be your operation in the tightness of the wrapping and in softening of that according as we have said about the first wrapping above.
And pause between the wrappings of leather or cloth according to which is wrapped up the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; and do not pause for any reason.
And pause over another cloth, and begin to stretch out those wrappings a little bit, if there is no swelling or pus in the place, and then pause over that water which sits the pus of that swelling; and leave it for some days; and then tighten your hand over those.
And make those sticks of cane small enough, and made in a way; or are they of fir wood; or palm branches; and be the width of each stick according to this form and that figure:
However, know that the stick that is placed over that fracture is larger and a little smaller than those other sticks, and according to how large or small the limb is; and tighten your second hand about those other sticks according to your first tightness; and begin to stretch out from under that tightness little by little according as we have said about tightness, and it is so that your tightness is according to the site of that fracture; and the more you separate from the fracture, the less is the tightness.
And know that those sticks are medium in size and thin of thread; and if those sticks are large, then so with the rope as you have seen in the operation of some foolish men pausing their hands at those times of strings of leech; and is a great error if one tightens the tightness equally.
And especially thin sticks are not convenient, because you do not obtain by that tightness the water that you want, and know that there is a space between one stick and another of a single finger.
And if the patient is laid down by the ends of the sticks according to his tightness in those places, then pause with those of leather or woolen cloth, so that he does not hurt himself.
Some fractures are of the neck, and happen disruption in the larynx, and I come to a recollection about that of the capitol according to its singularity.
And know that a broken limb is not straight with the sticks on the first day; and this is why the limb, when it is large, does not stop to rest on the sticks but waits for three or seven or more days according to your safety about the coming of swelling.
And this is the way of the embowels who with those the Ancients used to restore, who are placed over a fracture and dislocation and turning.
A way of embowelling like a sprinkling of the restoration of a fracture, suitable for complex cases and mainly for women and children, because it is not hot upon that which you put: and this is because you take powder of flour, and it is the flour's mediastinian movement in the miller's parts.
And then begin with that as it is, but instead take the egg white and then begin to spread it thinly: and then use that.
Another way of applying plaster that heals fractures and dislocations and twists: Take assafetida, myrrh, licorice, aniseed, and mirra, which is made from thousand-year-old salvaged grain, all in the proportion of one dragon; myrrh and aloe in the proportion of five dragons; alochic in the proportion of ten dragons; and all are finely chopped up and mixed with water or milk until it becomes a paste, for if the body of the patient is scarred, use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives life to many men.
Another way of applying plaster that heals fractures and twists: Take myrrh and licorice in the proportion of ten dragons; mirra and aloe in the proportion of five dragons; acacia in the proportion of six dragons, and bal armenic in the proportion of twelve dragons.
All are thinned in mortar to make a paste, and spread thinly on water or egg white, and then given it.
A way of embowelling to separate the joints and bones from their sites, and to ease pain in those and in fractures and breaks: take wool thread and immerse it in vinegar and oil of cayenne and then place it over the site.
May not be this embowelling's virtue of restoration, of swelling and expelling pain directly.
Another way of embowelling to restore broken bones: take sheets of fig leaf and sheets of poppy seed; bind all together and then make the embowelling.
A way of embowelling that is newly invented to restore the fracture of bones and when you want relief from swelling: take powder of elder, of chamomile and violet flowers, of erica flour, all of it. i. 266-270 All are thinned and spread thinly on the vinegar, if the limb is not scalded. 271-275
And if it is scalded, then begin with that immersed in the vinegar or water and then use it. 276-280
Another way of embowelling that is stronger in remedy than the first, when swelling occurs and you need relief: take elder powder and sage, fennel seed, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all of it. All are thinned and spread thinly on spring water or on warm water, all according to the quality of the limb and rest for the color of that water.
And Ioprocras does not tear in the five livres that are placed over the broken limb to restore it, except wax and oil, and for no other reason; and I recommend that it be varied between thinness and thinness. 286-290
May the plant called galaha be placed on the damaged member to restore it and the causes that produce it, such as cold, dry quality, which has been described by others in relation to those causes that we have mentioned.
A paste that can be used for injury and pain: take a little meat, chopped from the back of a horse or cow, and from the skin, and salt, finely cut up; dry them out, and make a paste.
The quantity should be adjusted according to how much the joint swells and how quickly it heals; consider whether there is any pain or if the bone has been broken, then you will not need to move it from its place; otherwise, do so with care every day. And if there is severe pain or swelling at the site or if it becomes hot, then you will cover or move it away from its place in that moment, and apply the paste to it.
And take a cloth and a sea sponge, wet it with tepid water, submerge it in the water, and then wash the site thoroughly until the swelling and pain subside; then let the member rest for an hour; then put a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar or rosewater on it, and bandage it over; let it rest for another hour until you are sure that there is no fever, and that the inflammation of the member has subsided, and the pain has abated.
Then repeat this process gently and repeatedly until the area becomes less tender, applying the paste lightly at first and then more firmly as it heals.
And if all the fever, pain, swelling, and other symptoms have completely subsided and you no longer need paste or constriction, then you may stop using them; once healed, there is no need for further treatment.
And if the member does not present any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not move it from its place for at least three days or four or five or six; and some leave it alone for ten days according to what you see by the swelling of the member, as we have said, until the fracture has healed, and if there is no pain when moved, then let it rest on the formation of new tissue over it.
Then adjust the constriction more than in your first constriction, and adjust the thickness of the paste according to how much the patient has been given to eat.
And if you see that the site of the fracture has dried up and become very thin, then know that the nutrition is being prevented from reaching it; and therefore submerge it in tepid water completely, and let it be submerged for three days; and relieve the constriction slightly, and by this operation allow food to reach the member, and heal slowly.
And that water can also restore the damaged member completely when not restored at first, according to what is necessary, and restore it according to its tortuosity, which is an error in their operation, and great fear; and if it was done in error, then let it grow larger on both sides while being moved around.
And I have not seen any of them use water to treat this, so it is reasonable for you not to do so.
For a head fracture:
Fractures can be either of three types: a complete fracture, in which the bone is broken into two pieces and separated from each other; an incomplete fracture, in which the bone is split but still connected at one end; or a compression fracture, in which the bone is crushed or compressed. In the first type, the break is caused by a hit or blow from a hard object; in the second type, it is caused by twisting or bending the joint beyond its normal limits; and in the third type, pressure is applied to the bone until it breaks.
The pain of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and the cause of both is impact with a hard object or from falling on a rock, and their similarities are as follows.
This fracture is either penetrating, which enters the skin and leaves it, or in the face of the bone, and the pain of these two types of fractures can be either great or slight.
A fracture that is being formed inside the bone, in the subtle hair-like part of it, and by which this type of fracture is called the capillary fracture.
It is a fracture caused by impact with a hard object or from falling on a rock, and its similarities are as follows; one piece of the bone enters another, and it breaks in the hollow part of it, just like how the pieces break when you hit them with a hard object or fall on a rock. This type of fracture is called an impact fracture.
It usually breaks in the bones of humans and animals, especially in the upper part of the body.
These are all types of fractures that can heal on their own, provided they do not cause any serious problems. And I will return to you with the remembrance of all this.
I know all these types of fractures through experience and by asking about them, and I have learned that the presence of rotten or decomposing flesh on the outside of bones can indicate the type of fracture present.
The capillary type is recognized by the appearance of bleeding on the bone and by the presence of pus; it is often found on the surface of the bone, and the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider at first the patient's symptoms and, if there is a clear indication of danger or an urgent situation, such as vomiting blood, fainting, loss of consciousness, fever, or pain in the joints, then it should be treated immediately; otherwise, wait for a day or two to see if the symptoms improve on their own.
And if you do not have any urgent symptoms that require immediate treatment, then begin the patient' care.
This is because if you have come into contact with the patient and then find that they are infected and it is wintertime, then know that you should wait until day thirteen according to all the arrangements.
And if it is in the summer, then know that you should wait until day seven to check on the bone; if it has been left without skin and there is pus, and if there are any of the symptoms we have mentioned, then treat them immediately.
And if the fracture has already reached the skin and is separated completely or crushed together, then know that you should remove the broken parts according to what I have recommended; this will provide relief for the patient.
This is because you should examine the patient' head carefully and discover any injury on the bone according to what is usual or by looking at its shape; it should be treated lightly for the patient.
And if there is a fracture in the bone, then stop any movement of it by applying cold compresses or poultices to it, and let it rest; this will help reduce fever and swelling. Then begin treating the area around the bone and removing the skin from it.
This is done in one of two ways.
And the first way is to cut the bone with straight knives, and this is how it is done: You use one knife to make an incision in the bone, a little narrower than the other; then you use another knife, a little wider than the first, to widen the incision. And this is how it is done.
And then you administer a slightly wider knife than the second one.
And since the various types of incisers have different names, some are thicker than others; and some are shorter than others, and are made of iron or steel.
And use their ease in striking the incisers so that you don't cut your finger or hand.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should strike it from behind rather than in front, since sharp knives are called for.
And they are not called this way unless the bone's edge on the test is cut off, because of its rounded shape near it; so that the cap stays joined to the bone's circular edge, which does not allow it to be submerged or go beyond the bone's thickness.
And it is necessary for you to take many of these knives, each suited to the thickness of each bone, since in all cases where the edge of the test is sharp, its length and brevity should be according to the quantity of that test' thinness.
This is the form of three types of knives: The quality of piercing into the broken bone is that you place the knife on the bone and turn it around so that you know that the bone has already been penetrated; and then move it to another location, and pause it where there is a quantity of the thickness of the edge or radius thereof.
And then you cut with the incisers where there is a space in the bone, and make it small that you can pass over it in the end of levitation; as we have said, so that you remove the bone or to your hand, or for some other reason using any tools that you will prepare for water, as tongs and forceps are subtle.
And since you keep all carefulness so that the inciser does not touch any part of the skin.
And then when you have completed perforating the bone, and separate it from the skin if it continues to run; and then extract it, since you can cut and close it with a sharp object similar to an inciser, but more large and more subtle than the others.
And if any part of the small bones is broken and twisted, then you take it with ease from water that you should get from the tools; and then put it in a solution of vinegar and wet the scales we have mentioned.
And another way of operation is lighter, far from pain, which is called the speech of Launce; and this is its meaning: it is necessary for you to start by uncovering the part of the bone at the place where the fracture is most violent and most evident, until when you have uncovered that part and have paused there the tip of this inciser slowly and gently, whose form is like this:
And it is that the lenticular break is sharp and does not incise any cause, and that the acute break is in two places at a distance from each other in length, as if times; so that the lenticular break fits to the skin with the sharp face of the bone.
And then you strike the inciser on one side of a small heel as long as you want to cut all the bone easily in this way when it is turned over, and be sure that such an accident does not happen which you fear in any way, and if the medicine was the most common among all people and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if it were sleeping.
And if the medicine has attached itself to any part of the bone at the place where the accident happens in some places, it incises it with the tip of the inciser that is lenticular, and releases it easily from water, because it is released from water's danger and its pain.
And if the bone's fracture does not penetrate within the skin, and what is cut off or remains on the bone is its edge, and it has sharp and subtle sides; then you cut that edge and remove those sides with very sharp objects of different sizes, so that they can be administered in any place where they are most convenient to you and the most right for them according to the shape of your operation on this broken bone and its figure.
And since you administer in your hand with the greatest sharp part of those objects, and then use the most subtle one; and do not stop until you have reached a place where you can administer the largest and most subtle object among them all.
But in any of the other small hairline fractures and subtle breaks, you administer according to what happens during your correction.
And this is the cause that has not been studied in all those arts. He shown you in great fractures.
And if the skin is square when you remove the bone, then you take a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it in rose water, and put it on the orifice of the wound; and then you take another piece of cloth that is folded or triple and dip it in cold water, and put it on the first cloth; and do not tighten that cloth but only as much as the wound needs. And then you administer very gently to it, and do not press it except by the quantity of the wound.
And leave it with this cure for a day or two until you are sure there is an abscess; and then remove that wound and administer medicines which are superfluous to dry up; such as flour of iron and flour of alum, and dust of endivia and aristology, and similar to them.
And this is because you should make a powder of these medicines and sprinkle it on the wound, as if it were dry; and generally speaking, administer in that all medicine whose property is to stop bleeding and not to bite it.
And keep your wound clean in your cure; and it should not be in a mask of balm or anything else; and do not add virulence to it; because when it is placed on the skin of the brain, it corrupts it and spoils it, and happens to the patient's bad luck.
And it happens to the skin of the head, which is when the bone is broken and most cured by your cure, and it is blacker in its surface; then consider at that moment if you happen to the patient' bad things that we have said, you know that it is dangerous no matter what.
And if you do not happen to be black from the medicine that is applied on it, and if this medicine makes it black, then you take a part of honey and another part of rose water. iii. and over those lines put a cloth, and then put that wound on the skin; and then cure it with the different types of medicine that suit it to be healed.
Chapter 3.
The Restoration of a Broken Nose.
You know that the nose is not broken from two little bones that are separate, or one of those small bones that are cartilaginous; and it is not broken and does not happen to it except for its shape being twisted and tortuous and narrow.
But if one of the two little bones is broken, then you must put your small finger in the nose and fix that little bone to the other little bone with a tiny splint; and push the nose forward and back so that it returns to its natural shape. Do this for you easily, and be sure not to damage your operation on the patient' nose.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach that one, then cover it with a piece of flesh so that it is equal to the end of the bone where there is little thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then make it look like this.
Then wrap him in a blanket for the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, then do so on the seventh day or until the swelling subsides.
Then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces if the fracture is in two parts, and make it as thick as the width of the nose's bridge.
And say to the old restorative that the cloths should be changed every day, but I have not seen it; provided that the cloth is wrapped in sheep's album mixed with powder; and then let it lie until the bone is healed and the cartilage硬ened.
And some are inserted into the nose instead of cloth, unless they are wrapped in leather; and it is that the patient already has a severe fracture of the nose and is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, make it with cloth, and if you want, make it with cloths.
And if another fracture occurs, wrap the nose in a piece of wax or resin mixed with rose oil, or with diabetes.
But if that does not happen, then wrap it with flour of sesame and powdered egg yolk mixed with sheep' s album; and place a leather strip over it, and do not wrap the nose with anything.
But if the bones of the nose are fractured or dislocated, then cut those off and remove them with instruments that suit them; and then sew up the wound, and treat it with water that hardens and consolidates it, and with cloth that suits it.
And if plague occurs inside the nose, then treat it with cloths and administer plasters of lead so that it is completely cured.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw has been broken and the fracture is not a plague, then consider if it is only a little bit forward, and is not dislocated on both sides; then its knowledge is limited.
And so, if the fracture is on the right side, then introduce the left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and resemblingly, if the fracture is on the left side, then introduce the right index finger; and push easily the little bit forward, with a little bit of force, to the end of the fracture inside, with ease at the outside part forward; and with that, properly equalize the two sides.
And if the jaw fracture is separated into two parts, then administer extension of two parts according to their direction until it is possible to make them equal.
And if a disturbance of the teeth occurs, then strengthen those that you hope will endure with a wire of gold, silver, or ivory; and then place it on the dislocated jaw with cerate, and place it on a double cloth, and place it on a large star properly cut out, or a single ring at its length; and then bind it tightly so that it does not break.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and suspend his food from sour milk.
And if you think that the shape has already changed in some way, then wrap him and leave it for three days; and then correct it which has already been changed and wrap it with flour of sesame, or sheep' s album, or flour of rice, because you will have taken away the cerate from it, and place a leather strip over it.
And when that is properly attached and adjusted to the wrap, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it alone until it is healed and strengthened the fracture; for these fractures heal in three weeks.
And if another fracture occurs, then administer water which has been boiled and cooled down, until it is certain that it is healed; and then remove the plaster from it.
And if the fracture is a plague, then consider if it is big or small; then you should cut those off with water that hardens and consolidates it, and treat it with cloth that suits it.
And if the orifice of the plague is small, then enlarge it with a needle according to your need.
And when you have left those off, and of those there is no need to remove them again, then sew up the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and otherwise, leave it with the cloth that covers it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the fork when it is dislocated.
It is broken in one of three ways. First, the bone may be fractured at its end and dislocated from the joint. Second, it may be dislocated from the joint without a fracture. Third, there may be no dislocation or fracture, but the bone will have been moved out of its proper position.
Whether it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts, without causing a dislocation; then its restoration is easy; or whether it has been caused by a dislocation; then its restoration is difficult; or whether it has been caused by a plague.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is a plague, is that you should prepare two assistants; so that one holds the aide and the other extends the fork to the dislocated part.
And then swallow the fracture with the fingers within that it is made according to its shape; and not in a small eminence or hollow.
And if you are uncomfortable with the extension of the hand, then pause the tingling of the patient' s hand or finger, and make it the size according to your need; and extend and lift up the fork and wrap the splay around it so that you swallow the fracture according to its shape.
And if you cannot throw the end of the fork to the outside parts, because it is a problem with the tongue; then the patient should lie on his back, and place a pointed cauterization instrument half an inch long in the mouth, over the muscle; and pause that.
And then the assistant presses the muscle to the dislocated part within that the bone of the fork is raised where it is in the mouth; and then correct the fracture and swallow it with the fingers.
But if you feel pain in the fork or it is too big, then cut those off with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then use one of the tools that you have prepared for water to cut those off easily. For this tool, you should use a saw or iron from which this has been made:
And it is similar to any of those which you have prepared for water; and that this is the shape of it according to its right side or left side: And let it be the size according to the water that you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the length of it.
May the length of him be according to what is possible for the operation; that there be two extremities also with times, and the one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the pus that you have carved out when you extracted the bone is wide, and certain of infection, then you should adjust the two lips of the pus to suture them.
And if the disruption is little, or you fear infection, then you should use the blade and powder according to the quantity of the opening of the pus.
And if infection occurs, then pour vinegar and rose oil and place it on that.
And if not, then you will have opened the bone; and so that you may see the hernia each day, and when the ligament is softened or you notice that the stela has already healed, then you should adjust it and strengthen the bandage.
And you should place the hernia's sleep on the neck of the patient, and leave it there with a small cushion; so that by doing so, the helper raises the patient's chest, and thus the fracture of the clavicle is raised along with the muscle; or the arms are raised to the neck.
And do not adjust the ligament unless there is an immediate infection or pus in the area within twelve days.
Then change the poultice if you see the face of it wet, and adjust the tightness and restore that, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has hardened.
And then strengthen and support it according to the month in twenty-eight days, and in some cases in certain men it is done within a period of time from that day.
Chapter VI.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Shoulder.
The tarte is broken in the patient's left shoulder, and not broken on him but on the sides.
And when the left shoulder is broken—and it is broken in the right place of the shoulder—it is not recognized unless it is touched, then according to the figure of the fracture and the shape of the bone, you should prepare him and reduce that according to the natural figure in all ways possible to prevent it from being difficult.
Then you should pour powder of wheat flour and olive oil onto that spot; then you should place a double cloth on it; then you should place a thin cloth on the stela, which is placed on a small table according to the quantity of the spatula or less.
Then if the stela is concave in some places of the spatula, then you should fill that with olive oil; and place the stela according to equality.
Then you should wrap it tightly with a cloth of linen, taking care that it does not become tight; and place the stela in its place until it has healed.
And you should consider the ligament each day; and if it is softened, then adjust it again and equalize the stela if it has healed from its place.
And avoid covering the hernia with a cloth.
And the tarte is restored in twenty days or 25.
Then when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the ligament, and that you know with certainty because it belongs to the bones of which the beginning is not painful and the dissolution is also not painful.
And if you press on the broken bone and leave it there without a bandage, then you should cut it from one side to the other, and do what we have said in the fracture of the clavicle for gout by chance if this occurs here.
Chapter VII.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Foot.
The foot is sometimes broken in its middle part and the tarte is also broken there, more than half of it, or completely broken into pieces and crushed.
And from the accidents of the foot when it is broken in its middle part, that is a fall inside and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, a loud noise, and vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the hernia be raised on its two sides, and a cushion placed between the legs; then you should press the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs to the two sides, and take care in the operation of it and in the equality according to all possible ways so that it may return to its figure, as far as possible.
Then you should place the poultice and plaster over it, and open the stela of a small table, made of cypress or ash; because you have wrapped that in a cloth; then you should adjust that without making it tight; and then consider the bandage every hour, and when it becomes soft, strengthen it.
And if necessity forces you to destroy that poultice or its corrosion, or pain, or pus that occurs in the area, then you should cut and remove that, and purify it with a solution according to the method of curing it; then change the poultice, if necessary, by water, and adjust the tightness, until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of the Restoration of Ribs When They Are Broken.
You should know that the fracture of ribs occurs only in its wide ends, which are connected to the two sides; and from the edges of them do not occur to those cracks unless they are made of cartilage. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling, you should inquire about that.
And the restoration be like this that it adjusts the fracture according to all possible ways, as far as it is able; and then poultice and strengthen the broken bone with a stela, if you feel pain from that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inside and it causes great pain and pricking, so that it occurs when you have wept, and because the bone has become wet with a cloth; and it causes difficulty in swallowing, coughing, and vomiting from a loud noise; this is a difficult cure.
And so the Antibodies are being formed in that with great energy.
And of those it is said that when you stop eating the hernia which causes inflammation and a loud noise, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven outward.
May it not cause a light injury to generate pus by chance if it occurs; and if it has already happened, then help is on the way.
And they say of them that it is stopped from being swollen and let it flow strongly; and it seems to be a reasoning, but nevertheless, it is feared that the swelling will throw away the excess to the place by weakness.
And they said to him: Cover that place with wool that has already been soaked in oil of cautery, and put dust between the ribs until it is filled, so that the wound is closed up when you wrap a second roundness around it; then wash the patient with the cure of pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if a violent constriction causes the hernia not to tolerate it, and the nerves are punctured by the tension, fear for the patient, then cover that place with a covering of skin, cut off the rib, and then open it up again with an instrument that preserves its shape, which is preceded by a scarification, and which carves the ribs with ease, and removes it.
Then let them adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and heal it with plasters inside until it is healed.
And if pus comes out inside, then let them wrap and dust with rosin oil and place it on the wound, and let it be cured by the water that covers the pus inside.
It is to be raised up on a bed where he sleeps until it is healed.
Chapter 9.
Of the restoration of fracture of the spine of the two and of the collar.
Some have broken their bones of the neck, and their атрицию, and similar to the vertebrae of the back. And if water comes out of one and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider, for sometimes their muscles are already softened and stuporized and dead and cannot be extended or strengthened those and when you squeeze them with a needle or they feel pain in them, then you know that it will not heal and in the same dispositions it is fatal.
And if they feel pain in them when you squeeze and prick them, then you know that the bone of the neck is saved and the hernia is healed by cure.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to water and want to know if it will heal or not, consider the feet of him.
If you think they are already softened, water comes out that happens to the most, and when you stand on their back, there is a wind and an urge to urinate, and some become raised up on their back and cannot hold it, then you know that it is fatal, and do not continue to work for his cure.
Maybe if there is no cause of those, the cause is better and lighter.
The cure of him is that you pierce into the sedation of the pus and put oil of rosin on the spine that has been cut, or with a cotton wool ball; place it over that one in some places so that it is sedated the pus.
Then place a comfortable and existing plaster on it, and tighten it with a thread; order the patient to rest and be calm, and not sleep on the back where he hurts until it is healed.
And if the neck of the bone is broken or there is some cause that has already been separated from it, then let it be dried up on a cloth and make it stand up; and adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture if it is large, and heal it with plasters inside until it is healed.
Maybe if the back of the bones is broken and it is the end of the fracture, then let them enter with the left hand into the hole in the back, and join the broken bone to the other with what is possible according to ease; and then place a plaster and wrap it up tightly, if you want those, and then tighten it.
And if you feel broken necks behind him, then let them stand on that one, and tighten it; and heal the wound with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of the restoration of the broken nose.
The bones of the nose are to be broken and if they are broken, then the fracture of them is not but a communication in their ends and is spread out in their length and declines in the halves inside; and pain comes to the patient at the place and pricks, and the chest is stuporized when the fracture occurs.
The restoration of him is that you extend your hand over it until it is above the fracture which is the shape of him.
And if the fracture is only at the end of him, then you swallow that one with what is convenient for you by way of engagement within that it is assembled to its natural figure.
Maybe if the fracture is in the long or already declines in the halves of him, then you prepare the patient's belly for your restoration of that fracture. And then when you have joined him, place a plaster on it, and tighten it tightly so that you do not fear pricking of the fracture or moving of the stelha.
And swallow the concave shape with water that it fills him within that he takes the strictness according to equality, and order the patient to sleep on his back or open his side.
Maybe if there is pus coming out, then you stop its spread and heal the patient from within until the pus is sedated, and place water over it according to what comes before; and then return to the restoration of him, and tighten it like this with a thread.
And if there are broken or separated bones, then you face them.
Chapter 11.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the neighbor.
Adjudor is what is between the collar and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of him is in two ways, which are: the first that you take a piece of fust with half-inch thickness according to this shape:
And let them be tied in two ends with a thread, and let it be suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then cut out the broken arm over the fust until it reaches the tip of him in the middle place where it is joined to the curvature of the fust.
And then hang up on that one any difficult cause, or the doctor extend it to the halves of him; and then let him take medicine that the fracture join with their ends, until the fracture returns according to what it is.
And the other way is that the patient be raised up on his neck and his hand be hung up with a thread; and let one of the ministers hold water that is opened up the fracture with their ends, and another holds pus from him; and each one of them extends to the half of him.
And if you want the spread to be faster, then you tighten it on the fracture with a thread and on that one with another, and each of the ministers extends his two halves.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then let it be stopped at the middle of the thread on the chair and on the other side of the fracture where it should join the collar.
And if the fracture is similar to the collar, then let it be stopped at that place and on the collar itself.
And swallow it with ease and do the work, and then when you have joined him according to what is necessary and is applied by good application, then tighten it if there is no pus coming out.
May it happen that an embolism is removed early, then the constriction will be left for seven days and covered with a woven cloth impregnated with oil of roses until the embolism is removed, and then tighten it.
And the way to tighten it is that you put plaster on the fracture and then cover the plaster with a drape; and then adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand over their muscle.
Then remove the drape and tighten the arm over the support so that the arm is in its place of support, unless there is a prohibition for this by any cause of the broken bone.
And then use them.
And that you put the plaster so that it is thick on one side and thin on the other; and place between each plaster the distance of a finger, and make the length of the plasters according to the fracture by adding three fingers from the whole break.
Then tighten the plasters at the constriction which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And that your constriction on the place of the fracture is tighter. And when the fracture has healed a little, then make the constriction looser.
And so if you change the position of the plasters and the constriction is still like that which we have said at the hour when you restore the limb to its position, then do it.
And if you fear an embolism, then you leave the constriction and the plasters in place for seven days as we have said above.
Then consider the limb in all its parts for three days so that nothing happens at the place of protusion or inflation; or is it prohibited for any food to reach the limb by means of a superfluity of constriction; and then correct everything according to what we have said.
May it be that you are certain that no cause of this will happen, then do not remove the ligature before three days or more.
And let them sleep on their back, and their feet are on the ground, and their hands are on their chest.
Then place a full cocoon of wool on the support, and consider for an hour from nightfall or from daybreak whether the shape of the broken limb has not changed or whether it is soft, and then correct it according to your power.
Then provide food for the patient according to the order we have given above, in such a way that the food is not strong at first, but then cover it so that the food becomes thicker.
And the custom of support and leg wrap is that they are tightened in ten days; and then cover them so that they are removed and given a bath, and have medicine applied to them which corrects it.
And if the fracture is painful, then do not remove the plaster and plasters in place for a day or for two months.
Chapter 12.
Of Restoration of Broken Limb.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forks; one is small, and that is the one which speaks soft, and the other is large, and that is the one which is placed from below the small one from the start, from its upper end.
And a strong blow breaks only the large fork, or the small one, and their joints are strong together.
And when the small fork is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and its healing is faster.
And when the small fork is broken below the fracture, the healing of it is bad, and its recovery is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Then if the broken bone is the small fork above, then it is convenient to the doctor, in order to restore it, that he pause a little extension with ease before him before he is wrapped.
May it be that the large fork is broken, then consider that he pause a little extension with force.
And if both forks are broken together, then consider that you pause the extension more forcefully.
Then consider that you pause the shape of the hand before the restoration of it and the extension of it on a cushion, and the palm of the hand is over the parts above, more than all the others, and the ear be lower than all the others, and the foot be flat on the ground.
Then a cushion before him in height or above it, so that the patient does not work for himself.
And then the minister extends the arm from below by the hand or limb, and another minister extends above it with his hand, and a third one on either side.
Then the doctor wraps the bone up to the best shape he can get.
And if the fracture of the bone is not severe, then do not cut it open all the way, but correct it with your power.
And if the fracture of the bone is separated more than you expected in the restoration of it, then do not force it, but return to what we have said above.
May it be that the fracture is severe, I have already written a special chapter on this, and then take the treatment of that.
And if an embolism happens at the beginning of your restoration, then you make a cloth to cover it with oil of roses and white wax, and make it thin between transparency and subtlety, and tighten the cloth on it gently before the embolism passes; and then remove the cloth and make plaster prepared from powder of moly mixed with chalk of huou, and then make the steles; and let that stela be placed over that fracture more thickly and strongly.
You know that the name of the steles for the arm is six, or that the fracture is in one fork or both forks together.
Then tighten your constriction over the place of the fracture more firmly and forcefully, and when the extension goes from the start of the fracture or lower down on it, then tighten the constriction a little less according to what happens before you remember the arm in the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture are soft and wet cloths, not hard or rough, and the cloth which is tightened on it is made of the same material as before, as we have said above.
Then consider the limb with plaster for a period of seven days. And if there is any cause of this constriction which requires correction, and then consider that you put the limb in water at its tail before it stops.
Then release the limb from restraint before stopping, and then tighten your constriction.
And if the constriction is already softened and the bone is already healing and looking like it, then correct everything according to your power.
And then consider if any food is prohibited from reaching the limb by means of a superfluity of constriction, because it softens that a little and releases it for several days before eating it, and then tighten it.
May it be that there is no cause for this which we have said, then do not consider that it is removed within ten days or less than that.
Then the hand of the patient should be suspended from its power of movement by a harness, and let him sleep on his back.
You know that this fracture is restored in 30 or 32 days, and very strong is the restoration in 28 days, and all of this is according to the dispositions of the complexions and the dispositions of power.
Chapter XIII.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the ankle joint and of those mentioned.
Do you know that when the foot has a fracture and the toes are twisted, it is not caused by an external blow but rather by internal movement.
And when fracture or dislocation occurs in the foot, let the patient lie on their back and extend their leg, keeping it still.
Then the doctor should extend the broken bones and apply a poultice to those inside that are badly crushed.
And when you have applied plaster and poultice, if there is no swelling, then bandage it well; and you have wrapped that in a cloth.
Or if the cut is on the inside of the foot, it should be treated with a long bandage, and the patient should be instructed to tighten it with their hand; and it should be wrapped well.
Then attach the plaster to the cloth that is under it, so that the plaster is applied to the foot; and tighten it well.
Or if the fracture is on the outside of the foot, let it be placed face down on a cloth, so that the foot is raised and turned towards the inside; and tighten it well, so that the patient's hand rests between their thighs with their fingers intertwined.
And if there is a fracture in the toes of the foot, let it be treated with poultice as described above; and if it is the little toe, then tighten it well and if you wish, attach a small splint to make it easier for the patient to walk.
Or if there is a fracture in the other toes (the middle toe, the index toe, the auricular toe, or the anel toe), let it be treated as described above for the little toe; or all of them together, which is better; or attach a small splint to one of them, as we have said for the little toe.
And consider, in your restoration, and wrap it up, the application of cold poultice and opposition - according to the same operation - to those mentioned above, according to the repetition of his narration.
Chapter XIV.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Pelvis Bone.
The pelvic bone has a fracture and it is evident according to the turning of the foot towards the outside and the top of the pelvis.
The restoration of it is made in such a way that the foot is supported on the fracture and another bandage is applied to the top of it, and the patient lies on their back with their abdomen exposed.
Then the doctor should extend the whole bandage according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Or if it is in the lower part of the pelvis, then let the bandage be extended to the top of the leg, so that the extension goes over it, and another bandage should be applied to the fracture.
And if the fracture is in the lower part of the pelvis, then let the bandage be extended to the top, and the extension should go over it; and if it is in the middle part, then the bandage should be placed on both sides.
Then the doctor should join the bones by their natural shape and the joint should be well-joined; then apply plaster and tightness to the member, if there is no swelling. Or if it is in the swelling, then you should rest for a few days until the swelling goes down, and then return to your cure.
The tightness of it should be made in such a way: wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, double it two or three times, and smooth it out; then wrap the back, so that it reaches to the tail and the pelvis.
Then attach a long cord between the pelvis and the back near the hip, and bring the ends of the cord to the top of the leg on both sides, and then wrap it around the back and pelvis, so that the cord reaches from the tail to the hip; and then make it smooth.
Then place a splint over the pelvis in the location of the fracture, and place another splint on the back.
Then fill in the space between the back and the pelvis with soft cloth, so that the tightness is secured.
Then begin with a strong tightness of the middle one at the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and if there is no problem with the member, your tightness should be less and more moderate and more soft.
Then extend the two ends of the cord to the top of the leg, and tighten them separately, making sure that the bandage does not come off its place.
Then leave the tightness on it, unless there is some problem with the member as mentioned above; and if any cause occurs, then deal with it according to the above-mentioned instructions, and correct whatever has happened, according to what we have said about fractures in the toes.
Or if the pelvis is thick, then wrap it as described above; and if not, turn it upside down and treat it with a solution that softens it, and then make it well with that which heals it.
In some cases, this fracture of the pelvis is strengthened by other bones that are adjusted to it, as we have said about assistance and legs.
However, in the restoration of it, do not cause a limp in the leg; and if it is restored alone, then apply another splint to it, so that it may walk again.
And know that the pelvis is strengthened after one month or a little more or less, and all of this depends on the complexity and other factors.
Chapter XV.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Ankle Bone of the Foot.
Know that the fracture of the ankle is severe and does not cause pain in the foot; and if it is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Or if it is a fracture, then there is only a crack or twist in the joint; and this is caused by an external blow, which is called a "plague" or "sickness", and all of it is treated as described above.
The restoration of it is made in such a way that the foot is joined together, and the joint is repaired according to what is possible by means of ease and simplicity and construction.
Then apply plaster and place it on a round splint, if you wish; and tighten it well to the foot.
Then consider all the instructions that we have given for other fractures, as if it is not caused by cold, then avoid all causes of those, and treat it according to what is mentioned above; and if there are any accidents, deal with them in such a way that they do not cause pain to the patient.
Chapter XVI.
Of the Restoration of a Fracture of the Back.
Know that in the back there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the spine; and the other is small and is called the hipbone.
It occurs in all parts of the body; and when it is a fracture of both arms, then the restoration of them is as described above for the restoration of one arm; and the operation on them is the same.
And if we break two bones together, the back becomes all bent.
And if one breaks the lower back bone, the back becomes all bent from before.
And if one breaks the upper back bone, it hurts much, and it is of those causes that you are not accustomed to.
Then administer an extension and a compression and a ligation of the arteries according to that engagement.
However, let him also consider if the fracture of the back is not serious and there are no sagittal fractures, that extension should be milder and less painful, and it will please you with its virtue.
And in the back is some cause of surgery on the ribs, and it is when you engage the stars and that you complete all the entire operation, then you will take pieces of a whip from the palm tree where they are placed for causes that are placed in solies, and they are only made of small size, and are not thick with the hands, and are long according to the length of the back, and from the lower part up to the ribcage.
Then wrap each drape in two envelops according to its length, and place one over the lower back bone of one side and the other over that of the other side, and they are from the bottom within the ribcage.
Then place the two stars in three places of the two extremities and at the middle, for with this stretching the back is forbidden to bend towards the right or left side, and it is in a good position.
And one whip has already been administered according to the length of the back, and it is placed on it so that it maintains its movement.
And mainly consider that you do not break something in fracture, and when there is a proper plague.
Then consider the back every day and study it well for later study, and you guard it from apoplexy and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then prevent it with water that heals within.
Chapter XVII.
On the Fracture of the Trunk and Bones of the Chest and the Treatments Thereof.
In the trunk, there does not occur a fracture altogether; however, in the bones of the chest, there occurs a fracture of some ribs; and in the ditz (ribs), there occurs a fracture little, and it does not occur to them except at the ends in the middle of the disposition.
And if the bones of the chest have a fracture and those bones are raised above each other, then place the patient on their back on the ground prepared in this way while continuing.
Then place one foot on top of the raised bones, and press them together, and engage them within so that they return to their places.
Then place plaster and stop it above, and pause the stomach of the chest on a small table where there are two flat surfaces.
Then strengthen that with a stretching downward of the chest, since you have wrapped it in drapes and with other causes from which it suffers.
And when three or four days have passed, then you will remove the plaster, since you will see the engaged bones, or if they are broken or displaced, and the operation in those is done with ease.
However, if any of the ribs are broken, then restore them, and engage them in this way with the eye and recommit them to you in the engagement of the ribs from the hand. Then place the broken star according to its length, and it is a little on the side of it; then leave the foot on the table that you have been instructed in, and strengthen it with a stretching downward.
However, if the broken bones are of the ribs, two or three or more, then you will place each rib star according to its quantity wrapped in a drape lion, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the surfaces of the table so that the stomach of the chest holds it in good retention.
And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you consider all the causes that I have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and prevent any accident with water.
Chapter XVII.
On the Fracture of the Skull of the Female and the Hip bone and the Hand of the Male.
When the skull of the female is broken, then make it a cutting in two parts, and incline it on one side a little, and let it be held behind.
Then the matron will wrap the skull with a cloth, and it is done in the skull of him with care; then the female will be struck, and she will lift up the two parts little by little, since all this is outside the back of the skull so that it returns to its place with care and the broken bone returns.
Then place powder on the two parts, and when he wants to urinate, remove it with ease and urinate, and reduce it and return it according to the way in which you mixed it at first, and then return to his powder first.
Then do this for seven days or more, since that is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of oil and tighten it over the trunk of him with a cannula; then insert all the bladder into the skull of him, and tightly blow into the cannula with virtue so that the bladder is inflated inside the skull, since the fracture returns.
Then it is filled with cloth and left for a few days according to what we have told, so that it heals.
And when the hip bone of the male or female is broken, then administer in the restoration and engagement of the water that we have told in the hipbone.
And this water that is right does not occur in these proximal fractures and that it is little, mainly to the one for whom there is study and use of this free book; since this fracture means to you in the main dispositions via rectal way in the restoration and stricture of him, and therefore understand well.
However, in the hand of the male when it is broken, take a cloth, and place the hand in that cloth; then wrap it in a drape, and wrap it, and leave it for three days or more, so that it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On the Restoration of Fracture of Bones When They Are Swollen.
It is convenient in you that you do not feel the fracture pain, and mainly if the bone is large, as it is the bone of the limb or of the adjutor, or similar to that, that you wrap it and rub it a little at first, if the conditions of the bloodletting allow it, so that it stops swelling.
And if the swelling goes away by itself, then consider that you do not feel it in retention, and if you powder on him with care, that you make a poultice and apply it to the injured part, or it stops going away.
Then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, unless there is a plague.
However, if the swelling occurs slowly, then you will begin to restore it within the ninth day, so that it stops being swollen, and do not approach it on the thirteenth day; since you would cause other accidents to occur.
However, if the broken bone is pressing against the spine uncovered, then consider that you do not feel it in your back with ease and a little extension.
And then if he is not yet prepared and the equation of him makes his legs too long, you reduce him by your own hands with this instrument; and it is an instrument made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches, and the breadth according to the amount of the plague; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of them according to the amount that you require in the treatment of any kind of fracture.
Then return it, and make it a little smaller in order that the compression on him may not be doubled in the hour of the operation.
And it is of acute edge to which margin there is in his extremities; and the upper part of him, that of large size, is placed between the cleats, and the lower part, that of small size, is within the cleats.
This is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labra volentz atelarem", and it is a little palette.
So that the end of him may be supported, raised on the end of the bone prominent.
And then you put it on a table in such a way that the bone returns to its place, and make it level with some kind of equation.
And then you make an effort to place the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin, and does not allow the instrument for good operation, you cut the end of that bone in order that the instrument may have power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone by means of the instrument which we have described, then cut it with one of the scalpel knives, or with a saw, in order that it may be reduced.
Then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and the pain of the foot becomes violent, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and thereupon you give the patient great relief.
When your work on the bone is finished, then anoint it with a black ointment and especially if it is in summer, do not stop over the plague of the wound nor any other cause that might make it dry or corroded.
Then administer the medicine in the hour of the patient's complete recovery from the fracture, and if there is a scar, cut it with scissors and bind it up; and use bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And keep it very carefully that the wound does not get worse by means of dirty hands, for small wounds sometimes make great ones; and they may cause great harm or death to the patient's body parts affected, so that it is cured. And if the break is different from those of other fractures.
If the wound is large or evil and you fear for the patient from any of the accidents which we have described, and if there is pain in that place, then do not stop over the ointment; but apply to it a hard wrapping cloth instead of the ointment and tighten it well.
When a day or two have passed, and the wound has begun to heal, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it with a sharp tool, and then administer cold water, as our custom is to do; thus, wash the wound thoroughly with the water in which we have made an ointment and some herbs.
And you will see that the member has become less stiff and hard every day; and that it is prepared in such a way that the corruption runs from it into the cleats with ease.
If the wound does not heal or become dry within a few days, then you will see that it is useless and that the wound must be tried in another way. And of those that heal slowly and leave scars, some are separated and others not; when you place the member in such a way that it does not hurt, then cut them as best you can.
If it becomes red or black, so is a sign of inflammation and corruption; then stop putting any medicine on it which we have mentioned in this chapter.
And of this putrefaction stop applying anything which we have described in the chapter on the treatment of wounds; but put the member where it can be seen, and bind it with a bandage as well as you can; and let no one think that he will die, for if it does not heal within ten days or less, then know that there is no remedy. Then cure the wound if it is visible; and leave the member if it is not.
Chapter xx.
On the Treatment of a Wound that Occurs in the Track of Some Fracture
This wound occurs in the track of some fracture and more especially as it approaches the joints, and greatly disturbs the natural movement of the member; and stops the blood from flowing to its part.
Then consider whether the injury is new and administer the medicines which have been mentioned here alone or in combination; but take some of them at a time, and apply them to the wound with a cotton wad; then compress it well with your fingers, and squeeze those over it in order to stop the flow of blood.
Then let that rest for a few days; and then remove it and repeat the procedure, unless the wound has become clean; or tighten it over it with a thin plate of lead, because lead has the quality of absorbing all that is inflated in the limbs.
If the wound has already become swollen and stiff, and it is necessary to cut it open, then cut it with the most powerful tool; then open it from above downward, and wash out that which is above the joint or below it, and make a clean incision there; and heal that part which needs to be healed.
Chapter xxii.
On the Restoration of a Fracture when Restored, and the Member becomes Soft and Flexible according to its Nature.
When a bone fracture is healed, and the member becomes soft and flexible, then know that it has been done so through various causes: of which one is the quantity of the medicine and the ligature with which it does not agree; or because of excess strictness in those ligatures from which food is withheld from the member; or because of too much broth; or because of excessive movement at the wrong time; or because of a pause in blood circulation in the part of the body.
And the treatment of it is to make the patient fatten, and bring his heart into harmony with the body; then give him baths, and apply heat by means of a cloth and cooling by means of water.
Then put a cloth on the member, in order that the blood may not flow from it or continue to pour water over it, so that food may return and run back to its natural form.
Chapter xxii.
On the Treatment of Broken Bones which have been Restored with Twisting and Disallowing any Operation on them if Necessary.
When the member has been healed by twisting and is free from swelling and prominence on the bone, and yet it does not prevent its natural movement; but you must not accept the word of one who says that a member which has been newly broken cannot be operated on.
May already be at war with some doctors and healers who have done so much harm on our land; and this operation is most dangerous, losing great fear of the sign of which is deadly.
If the swelling and pain are recent, then consider whether they are caused by water that is hot or cold, in which herbs are boiled; as well as leaves of alfalfa and mint and similar ones to those; and a paste made from a powder of althaea; or that a medicine be prepared with mint juice and mixed with gall; or that fig syrup be mixed with colchicum; and similar medicines to those that are called "amenorrheic consolidations."
And sometimes it is dissolved by slow rubbing that is wet; and it is given at all times according to the need of the member.
If the tortuosity is already present and has become severe and turns into a danger and causes the need for treatment with iron; then consider whether pus has accumulated on top of the bone, and the continuation of the bone has been dissolved, and whether it is necessary to remove what is superfluous of the swelling of that member by means of thin incisers; and administer it easily in that part with solicitude and study.
Chapter 23.
On Dislocation.
Dislocation is when one of the joints of the limb becomes dislocated, causing it to be immobile, and resulting in a deformity of the member, with great pain and injury.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced quickly; because if reduction is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and difficult to reduce.
And it should not be stretched or moved in the hour of the reduction, lest it cause muscle spasms and pain.
And when it happens to you, consider whether you should make an incision on the patient's thigh, and let the pus come out; and quickly reduce the dislocation with ease.
And each member be cured with water, from which the memory will return to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to whether they precede fracture or not; from the top bone pus to the bottom pus.
Chapter 24.
On Treatment of Mandibular Dislocation (from the lower jaw).
If the two jaws are not tied up; and the dislocation of both is done in one way or another: either they are loosened a little by a small movement, or they are completely dislocated and then softened at the joint before saliva can come out from between them and their mouths can no longer be closed, and their tongues are wrapped in the words.
When the dislocation of it is a little, then in most cases it returns by itself for a little while due to some cause.
And if the dislocation is entire and complete, then consider whether it is administered with slow reduction, and not delayed at all.
And if the minister has the head of the patient, and inserts it between the two teeth of the dislocated jaw from inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both his two teeth together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and places the others outside where they belong; and orders the patient to cease moving their jaws and make them rest in that position; and the teeth are wrapped and tied up so that they return to their place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and even more so if both jaws are completely dislocated; then administer it with water and oil, until the reduction of both is slow; but consider whether we have said:
And therefore, when it returns and is wrapped up, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on top of those dust-like drapes with cerot; and apply wax and oil mixture; and let it be tied with ease by soft leathery bonds.
And let the patient sleep on his side with his head between two pillows, so that he does not yawn to the right or left; and do not allow him to eat for a long time due to some cause; and have a sharp fork near by, so that when the pain returns and the jaws are locked, then take it and chew slowly.
And this water should be given easily; and do not work in the presence of the mouth due to eating and drinking and talking, so that the jaw is locked and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places; then consider whether fever and nausea will follow, and a strong odor will rise from the abdomen of the patient, and strong vomiting with pure colic will occur.
And when you see it again, know that it is a waste of time; and consider carefully the one to whom this happens in ten days.
Chapter 25.
On Reduction of Mandibular Dislocation and the End of the Muscle.
The furculum is not dislocated from the body by its own continuity to the feet; and some are dislocated at the end far away, and this is declared by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient sleeps on his side and spreads his legs. Then tighten the joint with your hand very firmly, for it will return by itself.
Then pause on top of that paste and dust, and strengthen it.
And the end of that which seizes and is continuous to it, is not dislocated on any day; then consider whether it is reduced and wrapped according to what we have said, and according to your dress.
Then pause on top of that paste, and dust, and tighten it, and order the patient to adhere quietly and rest until it is healed.
And with this medication, the end of the muscle is reduced when separated from its joint.
Chapter 26.
On Reduction of Muscle Dislocation.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated unless it is torn at one end or the other; and the one that is dislocated is at the end of the titillative.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the end of the muscle, and this is difficult; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder, and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
And most often it is dislocated and comes out at the ends, as in the case of titillative muscles, and most often it is dislocated slowly in those where the tissues are few; but in those where there are many tissues, it is dislocated with difficulty.
And a strong blow will sometimes cause the muscle to be punctured or torn; and the muscle of it is pierced by water that has already been dislocated.
Then consider whether you can reduce it while standing on top of it, and then proceed with the treatment.
And it is recognized when the dislocation is at the ends of the titillative muscles; but distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the one next to it, for you see a great difference between them; and you see the concavity of the muscle at the end of the titillative, and that of the one next to it, so that one can touch the top of the muscle; and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor can he move his head by all means.
If it is dislocated then move his foot or his leg, and you will hear a loud, clear pain, and do not cover it up.
And from this dislocation there is slight reduction when it is cold, and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to the patient's thighs; and approaches the strings attached, letting them tickle him, and raises the joint by strength in its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and extends it out. And then he lets go of those slightly.
Otherwise, if by water that we have said does not return, and only from the beginning that an accident occurs, days later, let the patient be bathed in cold water, and administered brocations that soften and smooth him out like cow's milk, and fenugrec, and melilot in water, and administered.
And the patient is to be raised up on his two hands and placed from the tickle wait for wool that is woven between levitation and constriction, and then the doctor places his foot over the hernia, and lifts up his muscle by virtue, and pulls down the patient' s hand so that it is not struck against those parts, and another minister holds his head, which is not struck against those parts, because that soon returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce that second in this way: and it is that you put a man on his back who is taller than the patient, and he is on the side of that part, and inserts his hand from the tickle of the patient' s navel, and raises the tickle of the patient to the thighs, while he hangs up on air, and another minister pulls down the patient' s hand from those parts of his belly. Otherwise, if the patient is still, let it be known that another cause is suspended, so that this one, because the dislocation returns soon.
And it is reduced in another way: and it is that a long staff is placed on the ground, whose end is round in shape, as well as made of mortar, which is not thick or thin, and it is placed from the patient' s side; then let the lion skins be stretched over the staff, so that the patient stands according to the length of the staff, and his hand is extended to the sides of him by strength, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if it is difficult reduction of him for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a staff whose length is two bras, and its breadth of four dizz, and its thickness is lightened in the preon of the tickle according to this form:
And then on top of the round staff are tied lion skins, so that the staff does not slide on the patient' s head.
And then it is placed from the tickle of the patient, and his hand or arms are extended over the staff within the sides, and the staff is tied to the assistant and arm at the end of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a step of steps according to its breadth, and the hand is extended from the sides, and the other hand is suspended from the other side, because the joint returns soon.
And when the instrument is complete according to each way that is possible for you, and then let it be known that you leave from the tickle wait for wool of a certain quantity; and then apply paste prepared of mortar of mill and egg white on all the muscle, so that it is turned over, and then tighten from the tickle by constriction; and the limb is turned over on the paste, and his hand is connected to his neck, and let it be, and not struck against his hand for seven days.
And since the patient' s food is reduced little, while his member is comforted, because it is easier to get better.
And then the food is given more, after seven or eight days, and exercise a movement; and if it stops and does not become soft, then it is healed.
Otherwise, if the joint is dislocated by moisture that occurs to it or by another cause, then let it be known that there is administered cauterization by three touches, according to what has been said in the chapter of cauterization.
And if all this is still done and seven days are passed, then the limb is separated, and the joint does not close, and the paste and constriction are a little soft on it, and do not close, and the muscle fibers or nerves at the head of the muscle have already been cut or extended or softened, and you know that the joint never closes in its place.
From the dislocation of that one which is caused by a fall behind or in front, the reduction is done by a sudden movement and an extension to the sides, while it returns.
And let be administered to that other constriction, and care to that one within that it is healed.
And if it is late in the healing of the limb and slow in its movements, then the patient uses bath with cold water within that his gravity is lightened and returns to its natural state first.
Chapter 27.
Of treatment of a dislocated collarbone.
You know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated at all parts, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation of it is not covered up by your doing so little touch or so some form is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated one with the hand on the side, then let it be known manifestly, because the joint is bent and cannot bend the arm, nor touch it to its muscle.
And since your cow is a dislocated one, reduce the dislocation soon in front because if you see it coming out with blood, then the reduction of it is difficult, and hard it does not heal completely; and more so when it is at the back parts, because it is worse than all the other kinds of dislocation, and more painful, and let these things be done to that one from which the joint comes out with blood, for the sake of the life.
And the restoration of him, when that one which is possible to reduce is done, is that his hand be extended by two sides, and his arms are spread out, and the sides of the doctor are over the collarbone and let it go, and press the joint with its fingers or the palm of his hand while it returns to its place.
Otherwise, if the dislocation is in front parts, then return it so that he doubles his hand by his side with his own palm, while it strikes the collarbone with its knuckles.
And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer violent extension and press hard.
It is that two ministers extend his arms, and hold him by the sides so that he does not fall down again after extension.
And then the arms are turned over all parts, because they are wrapped with a double-length cloth around the hand of him, or limb.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he unsets it with some oil so that this one is those causes which help in lubrication of the joint by ease; and then presses the joint with violent movement while it returns to its place.
And then the reduction of him is done when he is placed on that paste in which is stiffened and mixed with egg white, and is extended by constriction from below; and the arm is suspended on its neck, and let it be left for a few days.
And let it be unfastened; and if the joint is in its place, then unfasten the limb from it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not stiff, then unfasten the plaster and limb again, and leave it for a few days before taking off the plaster; and then let it be unfastened.
Or if it happens that gravity comes to the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in motion, then administer humidification in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or pause over the joint with relief, for if it is a thick mass, let it be bound, and leave it on the bone for a day and a night. And then hold that up, and put it in the bath; and when it has cooled, then rub the joint with moderate friction, and then repeat on it with relief, if it is noisy of movement, one time, and a second time, and third time, Corruption has already spread over the denouement of the bath, as it is limited.
And if you want, pause over that hole of cow wet and sharp with the blade and stretch on it; and make some cuts, for that is wet and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter .XXVIII.
Of treatment of dislocation of the shoulders, if it is of the joint that it is between the arm and the shoulder blade;
Of the shoulder a few times it is displaced, and the reduction of its dislocation is slight, and the opposite is of the other joints, but it must be noted that there is speed in reducing it in the hour when it is displaced, before the place has become stiff or is aching;
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you pause the joint of the shoulder from the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of it, and puts the palm of his hand or his knuckles on the proximity of the joint, and pushes it in until it returns to its place.
But moreover it must be considered that if the palm is already laid on the belly of the hand, then the patient pauses the two of his hand on a table and its extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous then let the two of the hand be laid intricately on the table, so that the hand of the minister is over the proximity of the joint.
And if it returns soon, it is good; and otherwise, then tighten it with bandages, yielding to the stiffness, and leave that; and do not repeat this, for, unless there are many days, it does not suffer nor can bear about the reduction of it quickly.
But also the joint follows its course; and there is no cause for the patient, but his hand is soft and cannot tighten for any reason; then you will know that the nerves are twisted or knotted, and it does not follow that it should be strong until after the bandage has been taken off and applied again; and if you make a test with a sharp instrument near the joint, and let it go, then give him a cause.
So then when it had recovered from the badness, then pause on it the bandage that you have re-tended, and let it be left and tightened for a few days; and then let it be unfastened and exercise the hand.
But if the movement of it is strong and comes to some gravity, then let it be held with a wet cloth and some friction made on it, until it is relieved.
Chapter .XXIX.
Of the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulders.
Some cuts are dislocated from the start.
And when a joint of the hand is displaced to its two of the palm or belly, then tighten that joint and push the displacement of it with the thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the tip of the finger, and hang it from the part to which it is displaced, and leave it for two days.
Then hold that up, and stretch that out until it turns on itself in that place of its day.
And when you are not busy, then stretch that second time, and do not cease to unfasten that in its day and exercise with movement, and stretch that at night; and make it for a few days until it is stiff.
Then make it similar to the other, if it is displaced to the belly of the hand, and stretch that at that part, and make the first operation of the thumb, until it is healed.
And in the same way do for the other joint when it is displaced to another part.
Chapter  .XXX.
Of the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulders.
When a complete displacement of the shoulder or collarbone occurs, and it is not cured after the course of treatment, then death awaits the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's speech goes away from him by will, and he cannot retain it; and some of his limbs or two legs or two arms become soft, or one of them is broken, because sometimes it is broken and sometimes it is made; and sometimes it is broken.
Then that is already broken into four parts and is called gangrene.
But the cure of it is that you should consider if the gangrene occurs from putrefaction, because there is no cure or recovery in that.
But in that which happens by chance or by impact or by analogy with others, the Ancients used long speeches for the cure of it, which sometimes returns and is renewed; but I have seen and improved on it from its excess by my nearness to it by means of an explanation, and I will present it as I have found it and explained it.
And of those is not cured but that which occurs to the two properly by means of a bandage which I have re-tended.
And the patient is extended on its face over a platform raised from the ground, and the instrument of wetting is extended behind him so that it does not touch his feet.
Then a stick is laid down in the ground at the end of the foot and turned over the head of the patient, and another is held in the air above his feet.
And the minister holds the stick, and does not hold it in the pit; and another minister holds the other one according to that form.
Then he covers the head of the patient and holds the little leathern belt tightly around it; and extends the end of the strap to the stick which is held above the head, and lays that over the ends of the straps and tightens them around his feet; and then adjusts all the straps and lays those in the other fust which is held above his feet.
And the minister drops the line to the start of the mast, and the two masts and the lines at their places are not re-rigged, but rather remain as they are, as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until he returns, or until he places it on a table, and so that he can adjust his feet on the table until he returns.
But if he does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is a third of a yard, and dig into the wall where we have said that the malady lies on one side of the table. And place the tail end of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and so that the spine is pinched and returns to its place.
And if you want, open the fold that is rolled up with the mast; and it is that you are on land you must place the head of the malady at the back of the ship two masts, whose length is a third of a yard, and you should place the head of him in the back of the ship exactly two masts; and the length is between each mast one palm, and so it is done on each mast turn by turn, and each one is stopped on land for it not to be moved.
And also a round mast in which is the fold, and turned in both folds of the two masts.
And at the end of him is a fold in which is formed the mast, its length being a third of a yard and turned up; and similar to this in the other two masts.
And tighten the lines that you have stretched on the feet of the malady in the fold that is to be placed at the head of him, and the lines that you have stretched on his thighs in the fold that it is to be placed on his feet.
And so each fold should be turned and a minister should twist the fold on his mast, and the doctor twists the spine as we have said.
And when the spine has returned, and the place is covered up, then pour on the dry herb of huou, and then stir; and then place over the herb a table whose width is three fingers or less than that, and its length be the quantity that takes up the place of the yellow-ness, and at the start of the spine.
And then bind with the line that we have said, and use the food of subtle nutrition until it is cured.
And if there is some urgency in the place at the end of the cure, then when the medicines are given that soften and clean up for a long time to come, which we have recommended; and it is given in that place a plate of lead.
And in some cases there is urgency at the back of the two spines, and it is caused by this dislocation; and it is that bone which you already suspect because it will not allow for making a late move with this medicine, for it would bring about his death.
Chapter 31.
Of Cure for a Dislocated Hips
You should know that the joint of the hip and the connection of the muscle do not end but only dislocation, and it does not happen in those places that happen in the other joints with small movement and concavity.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated at the inside, or at the outside, or in front, or behind.
And mostly it is dislocated at the inside parts, and less in front or behind.
And the indication of dislocation in him is four: when you adjust the back of the patient with the cure that he has, it becomes longer and his blood pressure drops more than when he is cured, and the patient cannot bend his neck because his language becomes thin, and this is the place where the thinnness of the tongue begins to thin out, so that the head of the thigh has already come here.
And the indication for those who have experienced this dislocation is four: when you adjust the front of the patient with the cure that he has, it becomes shorter and his blood pressure rises more than when he is cured, and the patient cannot bend his neck because his language becomes thick, and this is the place where the thickness of the tongue begins to thicken out, so that the head of the thigh has already come here.
And the indication for those who have experienced this dislocation is four: when you expand the patient's back according to the compliment, but does not bend that one side of pain that it is on the side of the sun, and if it goes down to walk and cannot go forward because of that; and his urine is held back and his bile is thin, and so his walking is over the floor.
And the indication for those who have experienced this dislocation is four: when you do not expand that side of pain that it is on the side of the sun, and if it does not go down to walk and cannot bend that one side because it bends the other; and the patient's back becomes shorter than the other, and his bile is thin, and this is the place where the head of the thigh has already come here.
But the reduction of these spices for this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already become old before he dies; and therefore it is not in that cure of all; and then it does not allow a late move to be made.
But in that one whose dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you return to that joint and extend those at the inside parts and outside parts, and bend them to the right and left, because it easily returns and does not require another cure.
But if it does not return in this way, then when you prepare the minister strong and extend the back of the patient from the front side, or under his sides, or with a line that is tied around his neck; and another minister extends the hand of the patient above his knees that his hands come out of them, and another minister makes points on the surface of the foot; and then tighten the line over the spine; and another minister holds the back of the patient on the area to prevent the patient from coming out.
And it is extended in him or in the front part to bend the hip at the joint of the furcula, or from the back part to the hip of two.
And it is extended in all these parts in one way within which the malady rises up to his head with his legs hanging down; and it extends from the ground.
And this species of extension is special for all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns at the joint that we have said, then it is necessary for all species that you tell about its own cure.
In the reduction of him alone, when he is dislocated, and if the malady is raised on his side, then place the lines over the surface of the thigh in that location where the head of the thigh comes; and so extend the line from the hip joint to the front part of the furcula.
And another strong minister takes hold of the legs of the patient and tightens them at the back part by violent extension because it returns to its place.
And this is a lighter cure species with which this member is reduced, less than the other species.
But if it is not obeying on you and does not follow this species of cure for all, then when the two legs of the malady are tied together with a strong line, and so they extend the two feet together and the two backs together.
And each of these two shall be longer by four inches than the other, and the cushion on the patient's chest shall be wider by two inches than that on his legs.
Then hang the hernia over the top of the pole, and let it be lower most; and let its length from the ground be two hands.
Then order a strong youth to cut the head of the hernia short, and let another youth hang the hernia by its tail; for the joint returns to its place with speed.
Then, in reducing it alone, when it is dislocated outward, guard that the hernia remains over the foot according to what we have said while we are holding it gelled; and let the joint be made strong upon the patient's chest itself and on his legs.
Then two poles shall be placed, one under the feet of the patient and another over his head; and two poles shall be adjusted to support the hernia, and let them wrap draping cloths around it so that the hernia is not dampened by the pole being between the patient' thighs, lest the extension towards the inner part be dragged.
Then each minister shall extend it to its place, and the doctor shall suck up the reduction according to the art.
Then when the dislocation is towards the outer part of the legs, let the hernia be extended slightly, and this is according to the above narration about the foot; and the doctor shall place his right palm on his patient' chest, and let him cut that with the other, and let him make a cut at the inner side at the same time.
Then when the dislocation is towards the back of the legs, then let the hernia not be extended at the inner part, and let it be raised up from the ground; so that if it is dislocated to the outer part, according to what we have said about the hernia's being placed on two poles, and its joints shall be extended, as we have said, and there shall be no turning back.
Then let a compression be given to the hernia on the table according to where the joint is located.
Then when the reduction is completed as we have said, and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and it is because you extend two hernia-cushions, and then you see those hernia-cushions being returned; and then you adjust two cushions and place a bandage on them so that the pole is not hidden at any of the sides; then attach the hernia to rest for three days or four.
Then remove the joint and the bandage, and compare one joint to another.
Then if you see those hernia-cushions in a firm position, and then let the hernia go away by walking.
Then if you see a cause of softening, then you return and bandage that one, and let it stretch according to your first order; and let that go away in three days.
Then remove that one, and let that one walk slowly over a certain number of days until it is comfortable again.
Chapter II.
Of Treatment of Joint Dislocation from the Back.
The back is dislocated according to three ways, because it is dislocated towards the outside, and towards the inside, and towards the inner side more than towards the outer side; and it is not dislocated towards the front.
The sign of dislocation is when you command the hernia to apply its cushion to the joint; then you shall know that the back is dislocated.
Then the restoration of all dislocations is that you pass your hand over the hernia's right side, and let it already extend its joint; attach the hernia to the patient' side with strength, and another minister shall place his hand on the patient' back between the two poles; then let another minister stretch the pole within the time that the hernia returns to its place.
The sign of recovery is when the hernia' joint applies itself to the patient' joint with a non-laborious levitation.
Then remove that hernia and attach its joint to the joint with a bandage for three days or four, then remove those.
Do not use the hernia-cushion for a certain number of days, until it is healed and comfortable again.
Then if the reduction to you is justified, then let you give strong compression to those joints in which the hernia is cured according to the above narration about the joint' treatment.
Chapter III.
Of Treatment of Joint Dislocation from the Front.
The jaw sometimes is re-set by a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement, and its dislocation is done towards the inside or towards the outside.
The sign of dislocation is when the jaw swells up to the side where it is dislocated.
Then the treatment of the re-set jaw is a gentle recovery, and it is let to be extended with ease towards its place and be returned to its place.
Then when the jaw is dislocated according to the complement, let you make your hand pass over the hernia' right side, and hold it with strength at its place in the center of the body; and let another minister hold it from behind on either side.
Then let you stand to the patient' right side with your head turned towards him, and let you hold his left hand at the top of his head in the center of his body; and let you hold his right hand at the bottom of his head on either side.
Then let you raise your head to the right side with your eyes looking forward, and let you extend your left hand towards the sky, and let you hold it there with two hands; then place your feet on either side of the patient' chest, and let your back be against his back; and let your legs be next to each other.
Then you shall make two movements according to what we have counted.
Then place your feet on the third time, and you are on the hernia.
Then if the foot returns in one or two times according to this way, and if the foot swells up, then it is good; otherwise, then repeat the operation, for that foot returns.
Then if to you is forbidden to reduce the hernia according to what we have said while holding it gelled, then let you hang the hernia by its tail on the ground, and let a servant place a mat under it; and let another servant stand between the patient' thighs, and make him step forward with his feet; then wrap a cloth around it so that the hernia does not escape from between the thighs.
Then let the minister of the hernia hold its thighs, and let another minister extend the foot towards its ends or to the joint on the side; then let another minister extend the pole over the patient' chest or to the joint on his legs; and let him hold it with strength until it extends from its sides; then let the servant place a cloth between the hernia and the floor, so that the hernia does not fall from between the thighs.
Then let the doctor suck up the dislocation with his hands, and let another minister hold the joint firm on its sides; because the dislocation returns easily.
And now, when the dislocation has returned and your health has been restored by the reduction, apply paste and extract it strongly with the hand, and tie the foot to the bed.
And since you fear or protect yourself from the nerves that are behind on the sole, so that the attachment to that is not violent and it is strongly supported.
Then leave it alone for two or three days; and if the attachment is softened, extract it.
Then remove it after three or four days, and forbid the patient from moving for ten days. But if it is forced to go forward in that space, it is not sure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and immediately stop it from receiving cure.
And if it happens that the poultice is burned, then when you administer to the patient in the cavity of the poultice what we have preceded in our narration, in another place of cure and ointment, until it is renewed.
Chapter.xxxiiii.
Of treatment of joint pain from the words of doctors.
But if that which is dislocated is wrapped up with a few extensions, it is moved easily; and if it is not difficult, advance slowly.
But if the dislocation is in any of the two feet, then when you cut off the hernia from the foot on a piece of ground or a table, and leave it there as if it were going.
Then stand on the feet, and place the foot that is dislocated on that which you cut off from the hernia, and place it correctly in order for it to return, and see if that has been wrapped up and does not appear in the prominent location.
Then place under the foot of the patient a table that supports all the foot, which has two heads, and tighten it strongly and firmly for three days; and then remove it, and let the patient rest from walking for ten days, until it is healed and certain to recover.
Chapter.xxxv.
Of the types of joint pain that are caused by plague or fracture or any kind of trauma.
When any cause of the above occurs to you, and if you are involved in the cure of that person and in restoring them, watch out for certain signs of death.
And do not assume that the patient will improve because you have used a poultice, but only as far as the wise person in the art has ordered it, slowly, with mercy and compassion, not impatiently or arrogantly; and let him use, at the beginning of medicine, poultices that cool so much, and leave the hernia to the divine judgment, but only if you hope for salvation from destruction, with alleviation of the evil, and in which there is some hope. Then try to reduce it as soon as you can from the beginning of the cause, rather than applying a poultice after cure.
And then, if the member returns as soon as you wish, administer to it what cools so much that it cures the plague with water that softens it.
And if the dislocation is due to a fracture and you are involved in setting the bones, then perform the operation and do as much for them as you have done for simple injuries of the joints, which preceded in the narrative of those.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that instrument in the ways of danger as it has preceded in my prediction; for that is better to you than to your Creator, and remains ever in your glory, and salutes your true master in the right time. Thus ends the words of Al-Bucealis, which he has explained fully from them, for God's benefit. Amen.
